Letters - Has crime fallen in Britain?

Also this week, Oasis’s loud music, Generation X, Mark Twain, chessboxing. Letters are welcome via e-mail to letters@economist.comFind out more about how we process your letterYou detailed the brilliant work of Jonathan Shepherd and the Cardiff University Violence Research Group (“Better angels”, May 17th). Their recommendations have led to tremendous innovations in data that helped police lessen the impact of violence. But the long-term decline in violence in England and Wales happened a decade or so before the “Cardiff model” was used. Violence declined from the mid-1990s, and so too did car crime and burglary. There were similar declines in crime across western Europe, America and other rich countries that didn’t use the Cardiff model.You also point to “better policing and changing social norms” for the drop in violence. Problem-oriented policing can reduce crime, but there is strong research evidence that policing was not responsible for the long-term decline. And reduced alcohol consumption among young people is a changing social norm, but this began in the mid- to late-2000s, which is also a decade or so too late.Property crime fell from the early-1990s onwards because of security improvements, particularly to vehicles and households. As fewer young people became involved in property crime, fewer progressed to violence (which is fortunately rarer), and fewer crimes were committed in which violence also occurs, such as robbery and aggravated burglary.The Cardiff model should be celebrated and replicated. The evidence suggests it may be responsible for some part of reduced violence in those places it was introduced. But the main lesson from the long-term crime decline is that government should shift responsibility for crime prevention to businesses, as it successfully did with the car industry. This includes internet providers, online banks, the phone industry, online marketplaces where illegal and stolen goods are traded, bars and clubs and others. These businesses often profit from hosting, facilitating or otherwise encouraging crime, including violence.Professor Graham FarrellSchool of LawUniversity of Leeds“Uneasy listening” (May 10th) looked at research into the harmful effects of compressed music on the ears. There are two main types of audio compression: dynamic-range compression and file-size compression. Dynamic-range compression does affect the relative loudness of music. A famous example is Oasis’s “(What’s the Story) Morning Glory?”. Nearly every song on the album is brickwalled, a term used when the waveform of a song is at or near maximum volume for much of the track. Most classical recordings would offer the extreme other end of this loudness spectrum, where the dynamic range of a recording is seldom adjusted or compressed. Thus, the long crescendo of pieces such as Holst’s “Mars, the Bringer of War” or Ravel’s “Bolero” are permitted to actually be quieter at their starts, rather than just seem quieter.Nicolas ColarossiPhiladelphiaGen X, Gen Y, Gen Z and the equally problematical “millennial” are arbitrary demographic cohorts (“Reality bites”, May 10th). In contrast, baby-boomer relates to a real, objective phenomenon, the surge in birth rates following the second world war. I doubt that the “Gen” descriptors are reliable indicators of personality or behaviour. It is implausible that an individual born in 1980 has more in common with a fellow Gen-Xer born in 1965 than with a millennial born in 1981. Categorising people as baby-boomer, Gen X, millennial, and so on is nothing more than a way of pointing out their approximate ages. Assigning characteristics to them strictly in accordance with these categories is an unwarranted generalisation, a form of astrology.And it’s not just unscientific, it’s innumerate too. In ordinary language, a generation is the average difference in age between parents and their progeny. In America that is currently around 25 or 30 years, not the 15 years that separates all the Gens except for the boomers, who for some reason span 18 years.David BookMonterey, CaliforniaYour article on the woes of Gen X mentioned two films, “The Matrix” and “Fight Club”, which came to define the overpowering need in the 1990s to break free from the era’s societal rules on conformity. However, the best example from that genre is Mike Judge’s classic comedy from 1999, “Office Space”. What better way to capture Gen X’s frustrations than to show a bunch of young, low-paid and demoralised IT workers take their chronically malfunctioning printer out into a field and smashing it to smithereens.Armen Manuk-KhaloyanWashington, DCThe cry “mark twain” did indeed mean that a river was of safely navigable depth (“Old times on the Mississippi”, May 17th), and this is how we believe Samuel Clemens got his pen name. But in his autobiographical “Life on the Mississippi”, Twain related how Isaiah Sellers, a steamboat captain, first used the name as a pseudonym.When he learned of Sellers’s death he took the name. Clemens’s life was filled with deaths about which he felt guilt. His ten-year-old brother died when he was eight; at 12 he watched his father’s autopsy. Then at 23, his younger brother died on a riverboat, aboard which Clemens had found him a job. So his story about how he got his pen name is consistent with his feelings of guilt and remorse, though some scholars dispute it.Richard WaugamanClinical professor of psychiatryGeorgetown UniversityWashington, DCI was disappointed that there was no mention of the Wu-Tang Clan in your article on chessboxing, a sport combining the board game and knockouts in the ring (“Queen’s gambit, plus a punch”, May 17th). The hip-hop group sang about “Da Mystery of Chessboxin’” in 1993.Laurie TimpsonMarlborough, WiltshireThe sport of chessboxing actually stems from the work of Enki Bilal, a celebrated French-Yugoslavian comic-book author, who introduced it in the last volume of his magnum opus “The Nikopol Trilogy” in 1992. Incidentally, it’s the only sport where “checkmate” is literally a punchline.Romain Poirot-LelligLagos