The world this week - Business

Donald Trump doubled America’s tariffs on imports of steel and aluminium, taking them to 50%. Speaking to steelworkers in Pennsylvania, America’s president said the levies meant “Nobody’s going to be able to steal your industry.” The earlier levy of 25% will remain in place for steel imports from Britain, which signed a trade agreement with America last month.Despite Mr Trump’s metals tariffs, stockmarkets were buoyant. On June 4th the MSCI All-Country World Index, which tracks global equities, reached a new high, beating the record it set in February. The index plunged after Mr Trump announced his punitive “Liberation Day” tariffs on April 2nd. He has since paused most of these levies to negotiate with America’s trading partners.The Organisation of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and its allies agreed to lift oil production by 411,000 barrels a day in July, the third increase in as many months. The cartel has been unwinding its production cuts after they failed to raise oil prices and caused its market share to fall. The oil price is down by 13% since the start of the year.Annual inflation in the euro zone fell to 1.9% in May, down from 2.2% in April. That is the first time it has fallen below the European Central Bank’s 2% target since September 2024. Inflation had been above 2% for more than three years.Elon Musk began a $5bn debt sale to fund his artificial-intelligence company, xAI. The firm also plans to sell $300m in shares. That would value xAI at $113bn. Mr Musk said he was “super focused” on his businesses after leaving the Trump administration.After ten weeks of due-diligence investigations into Thames Water, KKR abandoned a plan to rescue the ailing utility. The American private-equity titan had just days earlier submitted a bid to Ofwat, Britain’s water regulator, to inject £4bn ($5.4bn) into the company. Thames Water’s debt-to-equity ratio is 25 percentage points higher than Ofwat’s recommended level. The government could renationalise the firm if it fails to provide basic services.The price of shares in American nuclear-power firms briefly leapt by as much as 9% after Meta signed a deal with Constellation Energy. The tech giant will purchase electricity from one of Constellation’s nuclear plants for 20 years. Constellation said the deal was worth “billions of dollars”. Tech companies are interested in nuclear plants to power the energy-hungry data centres needed for training artificial-intelligence systems.Shares in Airbus, Europe’s biggest aerospace firm, rose by 3% on reports that China is preparing to order hundreds of the company’s planes. The deal would be a snub to Boeing. The American planemaker is about to resume deliveries, after China paused orders in April.The Federal Reserve removed a $1.95trn cap on the assets of Wells Fargo, America’s fourth-largest bank. The Fed imposed the sanction in 2018 after Wells disclosed that it had opened as many as 3.5m unauthorised accounts between 2009 and 2016, during which time it became the world’s most valuable bank. Charlie Scharf, Wells’s boss since 2019, called the cap’s removal a “pivotal milestone” as the bank seeks to put the scandal behind it.Rémy Cointreau withdrew its sales targets for 2030, citing tensions between Europe, China and America. The French maker of cognac said trade barriers erected by the two countries could cost it €100m ($114m), nearly half its operating profits in 2024-25, over the next financial year.The European Union warned that China’s restrictions on exports of rare-earth metals were creating an “alarming situation” for European industry. The European Association of Automotive Suppliers, a trade body, said that only a quarter of requests for export licences had been granted by China since the country tightened controls in April. It added that some plants had already stopped production because of the curbs.Texas removed BlackRock, the world’s biggest asset manager, from a blacklist of businesses that the state accused of boycotting oil and gas companies. Glenn Hegar, the Lone Star State’s comptroller, praised BlackRock for reducing its green commitments. BlackRock’s place on the blacklist meant that it missed out on billions of dollars from Texan state-run investment funds, which manage $300bn.Around the world, gamers queued outside shops to get their hands on Nintendo’s latest console. Retailing for $450 in America, the Switch 2 is 50% pricier than its predecessor, which came out in 2017. Nintendo predicts it will sell 15m of the devices by March.