Leaders - Africa’s most admired dictator rolls the dice

Kagame’s intervention in Congo threatens his legacy at home. Back in the 1990s Paul Kagame grabbed global attention as the leader of a rebel group that halted the Rwandan genocide, the worst mass atrocity of the past four decades. In the 2000s and 2010s he became Africa’s most admired dictator, turning Rwanda from a graveyard into a case study at Harvard Business School, with one of the fastest growth rates in the world. Those who pointed to his regime’s brutal suppression of dissent and assassinations of opponents were ignored. For Western donors, Mr Kagame was the leader who proved that aid could be spent well. For African elites starved of examples of well-run states, he was a role model.More than three decades on, Mr Kagame has gone from the darling of donors to Africa’s arch-exponent of realpolitik. He has turned to new friends abroad to gamble on state-led modernisation. In neighbouring Congo he has fuelled a long-running conflict. But the Trump administration, with an eye on Congo’s mineral wealth, says it wants Mr Kagame to stop meddling as part of a peace-for-investment deal. Unintentionally, America might just save Rwanda’s president from himself.Taking advantage of geopolitical shifts, Mr Kagame has befriended rising powers, acquiring weapons for his formidable army from China, Russia and Turkey. Rwanda looks up to Israel, another small nation with a shared history of suffering genocide and fighting its neighbours. It exports gold to Dubai. Qatar is financing a new airport. Mr Kagame has long shown how transactionalism can give minor countries outsize influence. His offers to receive deported migrants, export critical minerals, or send troops to places where the West is unwilling to go have helped limit criticism of Rwanda’s human-rights abuses and its backing of M23, a Congolese militia.Earlier this year, with the help of Rwanda’s army, that militia seized the cities of Goma and Bukavu in eastern Congo. In Goma M23 has set up an ersatz version of Mr Kagame’s rule in Rwanda; it is ordering the streets to be cleaned at the point of a gun. Elsewhere fighting still rages.Mr Kagame’s intervention in Congo has several motives. It is a chance to create a buffer zone and to vanquish the FDLR, a rebel group that traces its roots to genocidal militias and which Mr Kagame still regards as a threat. Rwanda earns hundreds of millions of dollars from exporting smuggled gold and other metals from Congo. Some in Rwanda’s elite want to redraw what they complain are colonially imposed borders. The arrival of the Trump administration, which Mr Kagame saw as less worried about territory-grabbing, probably factored in his thinking. Creating facts on the ground unbothered by an indifferent America, went the calculation, would at the very least produce leverage in any negotiations.The logic may yet prove sound. Félix Tshisekedi, Congo’s president and an enemy of Mr Kagame’s, has been weakened and his political rivals are circling. But the risks for Rwanda’s president are mounting, too.The costs of the war highlight the flaws of Mr Kagame’s development model. Growth has mostly benefited the urban elite. Researchers have disputed government claims about poverty reduction and agricultural production. The ruling party and the army own lots of companies, deterring private investment. The ratio of public debt to GDP has quadrupled since 2012, to almost 80%; the war will add to fiscal pressures. A gaping current-account deficit of 14% of GDP will widen further if the tourists who pay in dollars to see mountain gorillas stay at home. The longer the war goes on, the more Rwanda’s brand will be tarnished.And in a world where everyone is becoming more transactional, Mr Kagame may find he has less to offer. President Donald Trump, who opined last month that “there are a lot of bad things going on in Africa”, is not famed for his knowledge of the continent. But his administration wants America to get more of Congo’s vast reserves of copper, cobalt and other crucial minerals, and to see more American firms profit in the region. That could grant Congo more clout at Rwanda’s expense and imperil Mr Kagame’s influence in Congo’s east.Mr Kagame is 67 years old—middle-aged by the standard of African (and indeed American) leaders. But he is thinking about his legacy. The escalation of the war in Congo suggested he saw no tension between pursuing vengeance in the region and modernisation at home. But ultimately Mr Kagame may have to choose between guerrillas and gorillas. ■Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.