The world this week - Politics

Ukraine launched a bold attack on airfields deep inside Russia. It launched 117 drones smuggled in containers, including to eastern Siberia, some 4,000km from Ukraine. It claims to have damaged or destroyed at least 41 Russian planes, including strategic bombers, which are difficult to replace. A few days later Ukraine said it had “severely damaged” Kerch bridge, which links Russia with the Crimean peninsula it occupies, with underwater weapons. America’s president, Donald Trump, said that his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, vowed on a call to retaliate against the drone strike.Meanwhile, Russian forces advanced into Ukraine’s north-eastern province of Sumy. Peace talks in Istanbul broke up after one hour. The two sides agreed to a prisoner swap but not a ceasefire. Karol Nawrocki, the hard-right candidate of the Law and Justice party, won Poland’s presidential election in the run-off with 50.9% of the vote, beating Rafal Trzaskowski, the government-backed centrist. European populists rejoiced. A hostile president will be a blow for the liberal agenda of Poland’s prime minister, Donald Tusk. He called a confidence vote for June 11th.The Dutch government collapsed after the hard-right leader, Geert Wilders, pulled his Party for Freedom from the ruling coalition after smaller partners refused to sign on to his radical plans to cut migration. New elections are expected in the autumn.Dozens of Palestinians were killed around the hubs of a new aid-distribution system in Gaza. Some of them were killed by the Israel Defence Forces. It said they had left designated routes. Many Palestinians have to walk for kilometres to reach the points. The UN said that blocking access to relief may amount to a war crime and called for an independent investigation.Indirect ceasefire talks continued. Hamas proposed amendments to America’s plan for a 60-day truce in Gaza. The plan, which was accepted by Israel, includes an exchange of Israeli hostages (both living and dead) for Palestinian prisoners. But the militant group wants Israel to commit to withdrawing permanently from Gaza and ending the war.Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, rejected American demands that his country eventually stop enriching uranium. The issue has been a sticking-point over five rounds of negotiations. America hopes to reach a deal that would lift sanctions in exchange for Iran scaling back its nuclear programme.More than 1m people began the hajj. The annual pilgrimage to Mecca will be a testing journey this year as temperatures are expected to rise above 40ºC. The Saudi government is planting thousands of trees and setting up more shaded areas after some 1,300 pilgrims died in the heat last year.Five UN aid workers were killed when their convoy was attacked on the way to the city of el-Fasher in Sudan’s northern Darfur region. The convoy had travelled some 1,800km from the coast and would have been the first in over a year to reach the famine-stricken city. The number of people who have fled the country since Sudan’s civil war started more than two years ago crossed 4m this week, according to the UN.Mr Trump barred citizens of 12 countries, including Afghanistan, Iran and Sudan, from travelling to America, and restricted entry from seven more. The ban, which goes into effect on June 9th, cites national-security concerns. Days earlier 12 people were injured by incendiary devices at a rally in Boulder, Colorado, in support of hostages in Gaza. The suspected attacker, Mohamed Sabry Soliman, was an Egyptian who had overstayed his tourist visa. He faces charges of attempted murder of the first degree.Days after leaving Mr Trump’s administration, Elon Musk, a tycoon and nominal ally, called his “big, beautiful” budget bill a “disgusting abomination”. The non-partisan Congressional Budget Office estimated that the sweeping package would increase the federal budget deficit by some $2.4trn over the next decade. The bill faces tough scrutiny in the Senate after narrowly passing the House of Representatives.America’s Supreme Court gave Mr Trump the green light to revoke legal protection in America for more than 500,000 migrants who had fled economic and political turmoil in Cuba, Haiti, Nicaragua and Venezuela. Two of the court’s three liberal justices dissented.South Koreans turned out heavily to back Lee Jae-myung in a presidential election. The candidate for the liberal Democratic Party won with 49.4% of 35m votes cast. His conservative rival, Kim Moon-soo, took 41.2%. It was a resounding rebuke to the presidency of Yoon Suk Yeol, whose short-lived declaration of martial law and subsequent impeachment triggered the snap poll. Mr Lee promised to restore stability and revive the economy.The trial of Sheikh Hasina started in Bangladesh. The country’s former prime minister, who last year fled to India, was formally charged with crimes against humanity by a special court back home. Prosecutors accused her of a “systematic attack” on student-led protests in which nearly 1,400 people were killed between July and August 2024.Britain’s prime minister, Sir Keir Starmer, unveiled bold plans to prepare the country for war. The strategic defence review, which took a year to complete, envisages reforms in military procurement and organisation as well as spending billions of pounds on nuclear weapons and up to a dozen new attack submarines. “We are in a new era of threat, which demands a new era for UK defence,” said Sir Keir.President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva said he would defend Brazil’s Supreme Court from attack by the United States. He was responding to remarks made on May 21st by Marco Rubio, the US secretary of state, who warned of possible American sanctions on Alexandre de Moraes, a judge on the court, who is closely involved in the prosecution of Jair Bolsonaro, Brazil’s former far-right president, for allegedly plotting a coup.Low turnout in Mexico’s first judicial election raised concerns about its legitimacy. The country’s president, Claudia Sheinbaum, defended the vote, which she claims will combat corruption and improve the justice system. Yet faced with unfamiliar choices to fill 2,600 posts on all rungs, only 13% of Mexico’s 100m voters took part—a record low in national elections.