United States - What a New Jersey election says about MAGA America

Republican moderates have converted and Democrats are divided. NEW JERSEY’s gubernatorial election, held in odd-numbered years following presidential contests, offers an early measure of how Donald Trump is faring and how upcoming mid-term elections for control of Congress are shaping up. The two major parties will choose their candidates in a primary election on June 10th. Mr Trump looms large; last November he came within six points of pulling off a shocking upset here. Amid MAGA triumphalism in Washington, Republicans and Democrats will define themselves by who their voters select for what looks likely to be a competitive November contest.New Jersey Republicans have set the clearest direction: MAGA or bust. Jack Ciattarelli, a former state lawmaker, is the favourite to win on the 10th. He once decried Mr Trump as “out of step with the Party of Lincoln” and “not fit to be President of the United States”. Four years ago, when he narrowly lost the governor’s race to Phil Murphy, the departing incumbent, he kept Mr Trump at a distance. In keeping with the party’s drift, this year he embraced the president and welcomed his endorsement. At a recent “tele-rally” for Mr Ciattarelli, Mr Trump said: “New Jersey’s ready to pop out of that blue horror show.”There are about 800,000 more registered Democratic voters in the state than there are Republicans. But here, as in other northeastern and mid-Atlantic states that turn blue in presidential contests, voters often elect Republicans for governor, Chris Christie most recently. None of them have been as firmly aligned with Mr Trump as Mr Ciattarelli now claims to be, however. “There is no room in the party for a nominee who is not fully on board the Trump bandwagon at this point,” says Micah Rasmussen of the Rebovich Institute for New Jersey Politics, a research group.New Jersey Democrats have a wide choice of candidates to lead the fightback against Mr Trump in November. The front-runner is Mikie Sherrill, a Congresswoman and former Navy helicopter pilot; she often appears in campaign ads wearing a flight suit. She has racked up endorsements from the county Democratic chairs, but it is no longer clear how much that once-powerful New Jersey party machine matters. Last year saw the demise of the archaic “county line” system, which gave candidates backed by county chairs prime real estate on the printed ballot.Ms Sherrill’s lead is not insurmountable. In recent weeks she has become a target for the five other Democrats in the running, who range from good-governance mayors to unabashed progressives. Before she pulled ahead, she and her rivals had been more interested in beating up Mr Trump than one another. Josh Gottheimer, a Congressman from northern New Jersey, released an advert depicting him fighting Mr Trump in a boxing ring.Steve Fulop, the mayor of Jersey City, is not too far behind Ms Sherrill in polls. He has built a statewide coalition of dozens of local and state candidates as an alternative to county-chair support. Ras Baraka, the progressive mayor of Newark, is running from the party’s stalwart left. On June 3rd he sued federal officials over his recent high-profile arrest outside an immigration detention centre, alleging malicious prosecution and false arrest. The Democrats are also fielding the head of the teachers’ union and Steve Sweeney, a union official and a former president of the state senate.Democrats will chart their course by imperfect means. New Jersey’s primaries are not open to all voters; there is no ranked-choice system; and only a plurality of votes is required to win the nomination. Worryingly, a recent Rutgers-Eagleton poll found that only 4% of voters even knew there was an election on June 10th. ■Stay on top of American politics with The US in brief, our daily newsletter with fast analysis of the most important political news, and Checks and Balance, a weekly note from our Lexington columnist that examines the state of American democracy and the issues that matter to voters.