Asia - The mystery of China’s missing military

Why the PLA has ducked a brawl with America. Chinese military folks have never been great communicators. For most of the 15 years that Banyan reported from Beijing, the only way to seek comment from the defence ministry was to send a fax. A response would often come weeks later, if at all. The regular news conferences that it launched in 2011 are still dominated by scripted questions from state media. People’s Liberation Army personnel must have special permission to speak with foreigners. And those who do are often professional “barbarian handlers” specially trained to manage contacts with outsiders—and reveal as little as possible about the PLA.One exception in recent years was the Shangri-La Dialogue, a gathering of defence ministers, military commanders and spy chiefs in Singapore. The PLA delegation was usually led by China’s defence minister and given a relatively free rein to talk to foreigners. This year was different. China’s defence minister, Dong Jun, stayed away. Its delegation was headed by a rear admiral. It held none of the press conferences or group interviews of previous years. PLA delegates did their best to avoid journalists. “Please understand,” one pleaded as Banyan chased him down a corridor. “Maybe next year?”The low-profile Chinese showing, in effect, ceded the space to America. Without its defence minister, China was denied a chance to address the entire audience. And Pete Hegseth, America’s defence secretary, sought to capitalise on his counterpart’s absence in a speech in which he reaffirmed American commitments to the region and suggested a Chinese attack on Taiwan was imminent. “We are here this morning—and somebody else isn’t,” Mr Hegseth said.Even the Philippines had a bigger platform than China this year. The Philippines’ defence minister, Gilberto Teodoro, used his speech to defend his country’s efforts to challenge Chinese maritime claims in the South China Sea. Two relatively junior PLA officers tried to push back in a question-and-answer session, suggesting that the Philippines was an American proxy. “Thank you for the propaganda spiels disguised as questions,” Mr Teodoro responded, prompting laughter.What explains China’s pared-down presence? When its delegation chief, Rear Admiral Hu Gangfeng, did speak (on a panel at a side session), he said it was “normal work arrangements” to vary Chinese representation at the conference. True, China has not always sent a defence minister. But it has done so since 2019. Some participants saw a link to recent scandals in the PLA. Since 2023 senior Chinese military commanders, including two former defence ministers and the most senior admiral, have been put under investigation for corruption or indiscipline. Another has not been seen in public since March. Defence ministers at the forum have to take questions and China may have wanted to avoid a public grilling on the topic.China may also have been too uncertain about its relations with America to risk a public confrontation. One Chinese academic at the forum who did engage with foreign media said China’s priorities were to manage the trade war with America and pave the way for a potential meeting between Xi Jinping and Donald Trump. It anticipated that Mr Hegseth would deliver a more strident speech at the conference than his recent predecessors. But it did not want to overreact, partly because it was unsure to what extent he speaks for Mr Trump.A third theory is that China has become frustrated with the Shangri-La Dialogue. It has always disliked the format, which favours candid, unscripted debate. It also sees the gathering as increasingly pro-Western, especially as European governments have lately boosted their presence. And it may hope to boost its would-be equivalent, the Xiangshan Forum in Beijing.Whatever the rationale, the results were mixed. China lost an opportunity to present itself as a reliable regional partner by offering concessions to neighbours. It could have pulled off a diplomatic coup. Still, it sees no need for compromise while America is indulging in self-harm. And China will not suffer lasting damage from the rhetorical blows.Mr Hegseth, meanwhile, made some headway in reassuring the region on security. But he did not address the most pressing concern: American trade tariffs. And some participants noted that his position in America’s new political order was now more akin to that of China’s defence minister, who holds little power in a system dominated by one man.■Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.