China - Chinese students want an American education less than they used to

Many are staying at home or studying elsewhere in Asia. It has been a difficult week for Chinese students in America. On May 28th the State Department announced a campaign to start “aggressively” revoking their visas. One of the targets will be Chinese students in “critical fields”, the science and engineering programmes that are deemed to be of strategic interest to China. Another will be those who have unspecified “connections” to the Communist Party. It is unclear exactly how wide the net will be cast and how many students will be forced to leave. But for young people in China thinking about where to study, America now looks a dicey proposition.It was losing its shine long before the latest visa policies. The number of Chinese students there peaked in the 2019-20 academic year, at around 372,000. It then fell sharply, largely thanks to China’s strict covid-19 controls, and never recovered. In the 2023-24 academic year around 277,000 Chinese were studying in America. Increasingly, middle-class Chinese parents see it as too expensive and too risky a prospect for their children. They can find much of what its universities offer in other countries or at home.Since China opened up in the late 1970s, some 3m young Chinese have gone to study in America. Many have settled there. Others have come back, typically to pick up a fancy job. They are known as haigui (sea turtles), a homophone for “returning from across the sea”. America’s Ivy League became something of a finishing school for the children of the well-heeled in Beijing and Shanghai. President Xi Jinping’s daughter was an undergraduate at Harvard. Mid-career party officials have also gone to America to learn about modern governance.But for many Chinese the perceived return on investment of an American education has been falling. It has always been expensive, and these days middle-class families are less willing to shell out amid an economic downturn and a slump in the property market. They can choose cheaper universities in Britain, for instance, which in the 2023-24 academic year hosted nearly 150,000 Chinese students. Of late more have been going to Hong Kong, Singapore and elsewhere in Asia. Classes are often taught in English, and they are seen as friendlier places to study. The number of Chinese students in Japan increased to 115,000 in 2023 from under 100,000 in 2019.An overseas degree is also less useful than it was in China’s grim job market. Many of the foreign consultancies and law firms which once snapped up haigui have downsized their China operations, says one tutor who helps Chinese students apply for American colleges.Like many young Chinese these days, Mr Lei, an economics undergraduate, dreams of finding a stable position at home after graduation, in the Chinese government or in a state-owned company. Such employers are often now suspicious of graduates with a foreign education, he says. In April Dong Mingzhu, chairwoman of Gree Electric, a large appliance manufacturer, said her company did not hire haigui in case they had been recruited as spies by foreigners.Meanwhile China’s own top universities are increasingly competitive and attractive, especially in fields such as science and engineering. “China can catch up with and even surpass America,” reckons one biology phd student at the elite Tsinghua University in Beijing (ranked 20th in the world according to qs World University Rankings; Peking University, next door, is ranked 14th). “It just needs a bit more time.” Just look at his own professors, he says. The older ones all have degrees from American universities. The younger ones were typically educated in China.All these factors are going to mean the total number of Chinese studying overseas will probably start to fall soon, reckons Julian Fisher, of Venture Education, a consultancy. In part this is because China’s low birth rate has shrunk the size of future generations of students. But it is also because parents of young children are increasingly deciding to put them on a domestic education track, rather than applying to the international schools which could lead to a foreign university, says Mr Fisher. That has created a “time-bomb” in the international education system, he says. It will rock the institutions which have grown dependent on Chinese students’ cash.Many students at home do not seem too dismayed by America’s new visa policies. Mr Li, a masters student researching satellite propulsion at Beihang University in Beijing, says he can understand why America does not want to let Chinese citizens into its high-tech programmes (Beihang graduates have been banned from studying in America since 2020 because of the university’s close links to China’s armed forces). But he sees a silver lining. “People who can go study overseas tend to be pretty impressive. So if they stay, it will help domestic research and development,” he says. “We can’t change how America is acting,” says Mr Zhang, another doctoral researcher. “So long as we’re developing well, then everything is an opportunity.” ■Subscribers can sign up to Drum Tower, our new weekly newsletter, to understand what the world makes of China—and what China makes of the world.