Asia - Can India create its own Ivy League? 

The country is home to half the world’s university-age population. Why are they going abroad?. Around the world, university leaders wonder if Donald Trump’s crackdown on higher education might present them with an opportunity. America’s president has frozen funding to universities he has ideological beef with; he has paused the visa interviews foreign students must attend if they wish to enroll this year. India has been losing academic talent to America for decades. At the famed Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs), over 60% of the top 100 performers migrate abroad, mostly for America. Nearly a third of international students there are from India.One estimate suggests that Mr Trump’s policies might cause Indian students’ applications to American universities to plummet by a quarter from this year to the next. This could be India’s moment to reverse the brain drain. The problem is that its top colleges cannot yet compete in the global intellectual marketplace.In theory, India’s best universities have much going for them. Getting into Harvard is painless by comparison: admission rates for India’s most prestigious institutions sometimes sink to 0.2%, against 3-9% for America’s Ivy League. India is home to half the world’s university-age population. Parents drum extreme ambition into their offspring and widespread English-language proficiency gives India an edge.But so far, India has no entry in the top 100 of international league tables. By contrast China, having only broken into the global top 100 in the 2010s, now has the world’s highest number in many rankings. A big part of the problem is money. In the past decade, India has spent between 4.1% and 4.6% of its GDP on education. China’s spending on it as a share of GDP may be roughly similar, but its GDP per person is five times that of India’s. In the past decade China has splurged on lucrative research grants and one-off bonuses to lure back Chinese academics from the West. India lacks the rupees to match China’s academic charm offensive.Another issue is scholarly freedom. Indian academics teach from a government-dictated syllabus and endure oversight by the all-powerful University Grants Commission. An enterprising researcher needs clearance from central ministries when organising a conference with international colleagues and government permission when travelling abroad for work. Hiring at public universities is hostage to the whims of the ruling party of the day, since the government oversees top-level appointments.Lately government meddling appears to be getting worse. Last year India ranked as “completely restricted” in the Academic Freedom Index by Scholars at Risk, an international network headquartered in New York, and V-Dem, a research group in Sweden; it was the lowest score since the 1940s. “Indian public universities are an unrivalled shit-show,” says an Indian political scientist working in America. The syllabus he uses to teach Indian politics in America would “invite arrest” at home, he fears.So far, ideas for reforming India’s academia have not gained much traction. In 2017 an “Institutions of Eminence” programme was launched to scout for promising universities and reward them with more autonomy and funds. But not enough suitable candidates could be found.Similarly, in 2020 the government launched a new National Education Policy. It made bold recommendations to curb government oversight over boards and top appointments. But reform will be slow, not least because Indian states run by opposition parties are protesting against it. And the policy’s proposal to switch from English to Hindi at central universities and states with Hindi as their main language would hold back any institution trying to compete in a global academic system.The rise of private universities could be India’s best hope. Two decades ago there were fewer than 20 of them. Today that figure is over 400, or around a quarter of total academic enrolments in India. They have shiny campuses, mostly funded by big industrial groups. Many are snapping up foreign faculty members.Saumen Chattopadhyay, an education specialist at Jawaharlal Nehru University, believes the new crop of private universities will outperform public ones like his—precisely because they have more freedom. Exempted from the public sector’s expansive affirmative-action programme and government say over appointments, vice-chancellors at private outfits can poach top talent as they see fit. If the government finds a way of supporting private universities from a respectful distance, India’s league-table game might pick up. ■Stay on top of our India coverage by signing up to Essential India, our free weekly newsletter.