The Americas - Suriname’s chaotic democracy just chose its first woman president

An oil windfall may make it harder for Jennifer Geerlings-Simons to clean up the country. His finger ink-stained from voting, Wagirin Tjokrosetiko, a 62-year-old driver of Javanese descent, has a simple reason for wanting a woman to run Suriname, a multi-ethnic former Dutch colony of under 700,000 people on the north-eastern shoulder of South America. “Male presidents only fill their pockets,” he says.Mr Tjokrosetiko has got his way. In elections on May 25th the National Development Party (NDP) led by Jennifer Geerlings-Simons (pictured below) won 18 of the 51 seats in the National Assembly. That is one more than the incumbent president, Chandrikapersad Santokhi, and his Progressive Reform Party (VHP) managed to win, relying on the country’s large Hindustani population as its voter base.Suriname’s political system is unusual, designed to foster consensus between an array of ethnic groups. It is the only country in South America where presidents are not chosen directly by voters, but by a supermajority in the legislature, so real politics begins after elections end. On June 1st Ms Geerlings-Simons announced a wide coalition with smaller parties representing creoles, Javanese and maroons (descendants of escaped slaves). That would give her the 34 seats needed to become Suriname’s first female president.For 15 years Suriname has been ruled by three men with a history of conflict and betrayal dating back to the 1980s. The NDP’s Dési Bouterse, the country’s former military ruler, won elections in 2010 and 2015. On both occasions his former bodyguard, Ronnie Brunswijk, joined him in government. In the 1980s Mr Brunswijk had broken with him to lead a guerrilla war against his junta. He later set up a political party for maroon voters before joining a coalition with the NDP.In 2020 Mr Brunswijk crossed the floor to form a government with Mr Santokhi, a former police chief who had long pursued Mr Bouterse for brutal crimes committed by his military government. Suriname’s dominant politician for 40 years, Mr Bouterse was finally sentenced to 20 years in prison in 2023. He managed to evade jail, dying of natural causes in December 2024.A system designed to build consensus has proved vulnerable to corruption and dirty dealmaking. As a reward for switching allegiance, Mr Brunswijk—who built his wealth on gold and timber businesses and is wanted by Dutch authorities for cocaine-trafficking—was given the vice-presidency and ministries for his party in resources, forestry and justice. Since its transition to democracy in 1987 Suriname has become a major cocaine-trafficking hub. Mr Bouterse’s son Dino is in prison in the United States for drug-smuggling and attempted dealmaking with Hizbullah, a Shia Muslim movement in Lebanon. His finance minister, Gillmore Hoefdraad, went into hiding in 2020 and was convicted in absentia to 12 years in prison for embezzlement. Mr Hoefdraad’s appeal continues.The VHP government that Ms Geerlings-Simons hopes to replace has had scandals of its own. Mr Santokhi appointed his wife to the supervisory board of the national oil company. He attempted to give vast tracts of land to a group of Mennonites, a Christian sect widespread in South America, and to award generous mining concessions to a Chinese aluminium firm. Fierce public opposition killed off both deals. Illegal mining is rampant.But Mr Santokhi did lay the groundwork for a more promising future. In October France’s TotalEnergies announced it would invest $10.5bn to develop a large offshore oilfield in Surinamese waters. It is due to start producing in 2028. As part of his re-election campaign Mr Santokhi promised to give every Surinamese citizen $750 of this windfall. It wasn’t enough to convince voters.Though Ms Greelings-Simons was speaker of the National Assembly under both Bouterse governments, she has remained relatively free of scandal. That reputation will certainly be tested by five years as president. Karel Eckhorst, the country’s chief negotiator with the IMF, says she needs to strengthen Suriname’s institutions to manage its looming hydrocarbon wealth. “Oil isn’t the magic bullet,” he says. “Good governance is.” ■Sign up to El Boletín, our subscriber-only newsletter on Latin America, to understand the forces shaping a fascinating and complex region.