Asia - Lee Jae-myung is South Korea’s next president

What will the left-winger mean for the country?. Six months of turmoil in South Korea are over. Lee Jae-myung of the liberal Democratic Party won a commanding victory, with 49.4% of the vote, in the snap presidential elections held on June 3rd to replace Yoon Suk Yeol, who was impeached for declaring martial law last December. Mr Lee’s triumph serves as a resounding referendum on Mr Yoon’s failed presidency: Mr Yoon’s ally, Kim Moon-soo of the conservative People Power Party, came second with just 41.2%. Mr Lee will inherit a divided society and a battered economy, as well as big challenges from abroad, in particular Donald Trump, who has threatened South Korea with tariffs and called America’s security commitments to its long-time ally into question.Mr Lee’s win caps an improbable journey. Born into poverty, he dropped out of school as a teenager to work in factories. He retrained as a lawyer, became a labour-rights activist, and, eventually, governor of South Korea’s most populous province. In 2022 he narrowly lost the presidential elections to Mr Yoon. He survived after being stabbed in the neck last year by an extremist bent on preventing him from becoming president. Alleged election-law crimes threatened to derail his second presidential bid, but South Korean courts gave voters a chance to issue their own verdict.In choosing Mr Lee, however, it is unclear exactly whom voters will get. Mr Lee made his name as a progressive populist. Yet in recent months he has recast himself as a sensible moderate. “Our guiding value is pragmatism,” he told The Economist in January. He pledged to boost South Korea’s benchmark stockmarket index and to make big investments in artificial intelligence. He endorsed South Korea’s alliance with America and closer co-operation with Japan. Although he has called for stabilising relations with China, he pushed back against critics who label him pro-Chinese.However Mr Lee decides to govern, he will enjoy a commanding position, with his party controlling a majority in parliament. His first priorities will be domestic. He has called for constitutional amendments to allow presidents to serve two four-year terms instead of a single five-year term and also to make it harder to impose martial law. He also promised a fiscal stimulus package to boost the struggling economy.But the outside world will not give the new president much respite. Mr Trump imposed steep levies on industries in which South Korean firms excel, such as cars and steel, and threatened additional 25% tariffs on goods from South Korea (which has a free-trade agreement with America). A clash also looms over whether America should maintain its current troop levels on the Korean peninsula and continue to dedicate those forces to the defence of South Korea against its nuclear-armed northern neighbour—or divert them to broader regional goals, such as deterring China.Mr Trump may also restart negotiations with North Korea’s dictator, Kim Jong Un. On that matter, he and Mr Lee, an advocate of more engagement with the North, could find common cause. But if Mr Trump cuts a deal over Mr Lee’s head, it could fuel South Korean fears of abandonment. What’s more, far-right allies of Mr Trump in America have embraced conspiracies spread by South Korea’s far-right that Mr Lee is a communist and his election was fraudulent.Other diplomatic challenges loom. Mr Lee’s attitudes towards Japan will face an early litmus test when the two countries mark the 60th anniversary of their formal ties on June 22nd, an occasion that will bring the historical awkwardness in their relationship to the fore. In October South Korea will host an APEC summit, which will strain Mr Lee’s ability to balance between America, China and Russia.Many South Koreans will be happy to see an end to the Yoon era. But, even so, any sense of relief will be brief. As Mr Lee himself acknowledged in his inauguration speech on June 4th, “Unfortunately, we now face a complex web of overlapping crises in every sphere.” ■