Middle East & Africa - Israel “won’t commit suicide”, says the government’s ideologue 

In an interview Bezalel Smotrich is uncompromising about the war in Gaza. ACCORDING TO THE unofficial ideologue of Israel’s government, its war in Gaza is going well. The new plan to distribute aid to civilians through hubs controlled by Israel is working, says Bezalel Smotrich, the finance minister. It is a “gamechanger” in the fight against Hamas. He has repeatedly opposed ceasefires, by threatening to leave the coalition of which he is a key member.Now he has a different emphasis. Providing the government seeks to end the war with the defeat of Hamas, he will stay (though there is now a chance that the government may be brought down imminently by its ultra-Orthodox partners, who are frustrated that a controversial law exempting religious students from military service has not been passed by the coalition).Since the atrocities of October 7th 2023 Mr Smotrich’s words have been among the most incendiary from Israeli politicians. He has predicted Gaza will be “totally destroyed”. He has been accused of justifying starvation as a tactic in war, saying last year that aid should flow into Gaza only if the hostages are returned.In an interview with The Economist on June 3rd he sought to present himself as a sober-minded, constructive member of the government. But there is no disguising that his vision is extreme and messianic. The war has given him and those who share his views an opening, and they have seized it.The day after we spoke to Mr Smotrich, Israel closed its new aid centres in Gaza temporarily. The Israel Defence Forces said that the roads leading to the hubs will be considered “combat zones”. That decision came after days of chaos around the distribution centres in which dozens of Gazans were shot and killed on their way to collect food.Under the new system, aid is brought in convoys protected by Israel and distributed by American mercenaries, rather than by the UN. Gazans must travel to any of four distribution hubs in the ruined enclave to pick up family-sized boxes on a weekly basis. Mr Smotrich says this method of delivering aid is important for Israel to win the war.He says he is bewildered by criticism from international aid organisations and European governments. Critics say the aid scheme is insufficient to feed Gaza’s hungry people and a cover for plans to corral Palestinians into a small area while depopulating most of Gaza. It is the best way to shorten the war and alleviate suffering, counters the finance minister.He claims he has always favoured letting aid into Gaza (though less than two months ago he said Israel should not allow “even a grain of wheat” to enter the strip); he simply opposed the way in which it was being done. He said it kept Gazans reliant on Hamas and allowed the group to profit from it. Breaking that link is crucial to Israel’s victory, he explains.Stick to the plan and the war can be over in a matter of months, he says, but Hamas must surrender, disarm and send its leaders into exile. Anything less will leave the group in a position to attack again in a few years. Once Hamas is gone, Gaza can be “rehabilitated”, he says. But the tunnels used by Hamas will still need to be dismantled; so far Israel has destroyed only a quarter, he claims. If Hamas does not leave, and the fighting continues, further devastation for Gaza seems inevitable.Mr Smotrich acknowledges no wrongdoing on Israel’s part. More than 50,000 Palestinians have been killed but he says the ground assault has been “gentle” and the army has been “using tweezers” in its targeting. He says half of those killed are combatants (Israeli officers say it is closer to a third; there are no verified figures distinguishing between combatant and civilian fatalities). He blames Hamas, as terrorists who hide behind civilians, for the death toll.He has no thought of Israel leaving Gaza. He has called for the building of Israeli settlements throughout a Gaza depopulated of Palestinians: “Where there are settlements and the army, there’s security; where there aren’t settlements and army, there is no security.” He denies Gazans would be forced to leave but concedes that the war has rendered Gaza uninhabitable and that those who want to should be “allowed” to emigrate. The European countries that are threatening to impose sanctions on Israel and “preach” about solving the conflict should welcome Palestinians, he suggests.His longer-term vision for the Palestinians involves them either abandoning the land that Israel occupies or living with limited rights under its control. Mr Smotrich grew up in settlements in the West Bank (which he insists on calling Judea and Samaria, its biblical name). He still lives in one and rejects any possibility of Palestinian statehood there. He says allowing this would create the “existential” threat of an attack on Israel “20 times worse” than the one that occurred on October 7th.When it comes to Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza, “there is a big difference between individual rights and national rights”. This means that most Palestinians, apart from those who currently live in Israel, will remain without full citizenship or voting rights. “If there is a process of deradicalisation, if there is a generation that accepts that Israel is a Jewish and democratic state, that wants to live with us in a pact…I don’t mind giving them the vote,” he suggests. But “I can’t let them destroy me through democracy after they failed to do it by terror.”This seems to rule out normalising relations with Saudi Arabia. The kingdom has said it will not establish ties with Israel without a process towards a Palestinian state. A Saudi deal is a prize but “we won’t commit suicide for it”, says Mr Smotrich. He insists that “in closed rooms” Israel is hearing other things from its Arab counterparts: “All our neighbours are looking at Gaza and waiting to see what we do.” He is confident that a bright future of regional integration awaits.Israelis may welcome the finance minister’s talk of peace with their neighbours but his vision for their country raises alarms. Some fear that, given the opportunity, he would turn Israel into a theocracy. Asked about his call in 2019 for restoring “the laws of the Torah” as in the biblical days of King David, he says: “There is no contradiction between halachic [religious] law and democracy.”Mr Smotrich is in many ways a minority figure. Were elections to be held, surveys indicate his ultra-nationalist party would struggle to cross the electoral threshold of 3.25% of the vote. At best, it would win a handful of seats. After Binyamin Netanyahu returned as prime minister in 2022, he insisted that the far right “are joining me, I’m not joining them”.And yet this is the hardliners’ government. Under their pressure it has tried to tamper with Israel’s legal system and has lavishly funded religious programmes and expanded settlements in the West Bank, with a stated aim to annex the territory. If Mr Smotrich left the coalition, his fellow radical, Itamar Ben-Gvir, would follow suit, denying Mr Netanyahu his majority. But Mr Smotrich has stayed because, for him, the war has proved an unparalleled opportunity to fulfil his long-held vision. ■Sign up to the Middle East Dispatch, a weekly newsletter that keeps you in the loop on a fascinating, complex and consequential part of the world.