Middle East & Africa - Africa’s cynical master of power politics 

Can Paul Kagame, Rwanda’s dictator, secure his legacy at home and abroad?. For the moment there is not much to see in Bugesera, a district replete with verdant bush 45km south of Kigali, Rwanda’s capital. But it is the site of what Paul Kagame, the president of the central African country of 14m people, views as a legacy project. If all goes to plan there will soon be an airport complex, financed largely by Qatar, that he hopes will aid the transformation of Rwanda from, in 1994, the blood-drenched scene of a genocide to an African emirate—a hub for commerce and a draw for tourists keen to snap the gorillas that lurk in the country’s mountains. Mr Kagame, a fan of Formula One, wants to host what would be Africa’s only circuit.But Mr Kagame also has other ideas for his legacy. Some 200km to the west are Goma and Bukavu, respectively the capitals of North and South Kivu, the provinces in the Democratic Republic of Congo that border Rwanda (see map). Earlier this year M23, a Congolese militia supported by Rwanda, seized the cities, escalating a conflict between Congo and its neighbour that has its roots in the genocide and has flared repeatedly in the decades since. The war has uprooted millions and, this year alone, killed thousands.The last time M23 took Goma, in 2012, Western pressure on Mr Kagame led to the group’s withdrawal after 11 days. This time the militia has stayed put. Rwanda’s president, who has long aspired to greater influence over eastern Congo, has gambled that he might get away with it.In doing so Mr Kagame is showing that as a leader he embodies a changing Africa—and a changing world. He courts rising middle powers. He was transactional before that was the go-to term for today’s realpolitik. He learns from other leaders who flout norms and laws. His image as an effective strongman with a go-to-hell attitude towards Western critics makes him popular in Africa as the continent seeks to reduce its dependency on others.Now Mr Kagame’s attempt to exploit the moment faces a huge test. Congo has been added to the list of conflicts that Donald Trump believes he can fix with hard-headed diplomacy. That is an opportunity to cement Rwanda’s hold on the Kivus. But it is also a challenge, since the Trump administration wants Rwanda to stop its meddling there as part of a peace deal that would see more American investment in the region, especially in mining. It could be a moment of triumph for Mr Kagame or an indication that he has overreached.Mr Kagame’s evolution can be seen in three phases. In the first he was the rebel leader of the armed wing of the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF), a party dominated by Rwanda’s Tutsi minority. Mr Kagame’s rebels fought a civil war against Rwanda’s Hutu-led regime in the early 1990s. When that regime slaughtered more than 500,000 Rwandans, mostly Tutsi, in the space of around 100 days in 1994, he led his forces from Uganda to end the genocide. Mr Kagame has run Rwanda ever since, though he became president only in 2000.After the genocide the RPF took the fight across the border with what was then Zaire, in the name of hunting down fleeing génocidaires. Human-rights groups allege that the Rwandan army killed many civilians in the process. In 1997 Rwanda, alongside Uganda, toppled Mobutu Sese Seko, Zaire’s dictator, and installed Laurent Kabila as leader of what became Congo. When Kabila proved less pliant than it hoped, Rwanda invaded again, helping bring about the Second Congo War, which involved nine African states and the deaths of millions. The war ended in the early 2000s and Rwanda withdrew. But Mr Kagame never stopped seeing eastern Congo as in his zone of interest.The end of that war made it easier for Mr Kagame to present his second phase to the world—that of a “donor darling”. Western powers lavished aid on Rwanda, partly because of a sense of guilt that they had not done enough to stop the genocide, and partly because Mr Kagame’s government seemingly offered rare proof that donor cash could be spent well in Africa.Since 1994 economic growth has averaged 6.7% per year, the eighth-fastest rate of the nearly 200 countries tracked by the IMF, and ahead of Vietnam and India. GDP per person, just over $250 a year at the turn of the century, has since quadrupled to around $1,000 a year. Rwanda has tried to build a service economy based on tourism, conferences and finance. It has promoted “Brand Rwanda” via sponsorship of football teams and paid media (most of the money is spent on advertising for tourism). Mr Kagame’s “Vision 2050” aims to make Rwanda a high-income country by the middle of the century.There is a lot to do. The rural poor, most of whom are subsistence farmers (and Hutus), have benefited less from growth than the urban rich (who are disproportionately Tutsis). Rwanda’s rate of inequality is among the highest in east Africa. Researchers have questioned Rwanda’s claims about poverty reduction and agricultural production.Questions are increasingly asked about the macroeconomy, too. The current-account deficit is a troubling 13.8% of GDP. The ratio of public debt to GDP has risen from 19% to 78% since 2012, in part because of projects like the airport. The role of the RPF and the Rwandan Defence Forces (RDF), the army, in the economy crowds out private investment. They run firms involved in everything from milk to construction and private security.Not that there is much open questioning in Rwanda. Dissent from the official narrative—that Mr Kagame saved the country and is rebuilding a united nation where nationality trumps ethnicity—is crushed in the name of stopping more bloodshed. Dissidents abroad are threatened and sometimes assassinated, according to Human Rights Watch (HRW). Opposition politicians have been jailed, and barred from elections that Mr Kagame wins with close to 100% of the vote.Despite—or perhaps because of—his ruthlessness Mr Kagame remains popular among Africa’s elite. To many he embodies the sense of urgency, confidence and self-reliance they wish their leaders had at a time of aid cuts and trade turmoil. In an unscientific straw poll at a recent business conference in Ivory Coast, about which African leader attendees would like running their country, Mr Kagame won by a landslide. “He manages to run effectively two states, both well—a competent bureaucracy and a ruthlessly efficient military,” says a former Kenyan politician.The debate about whether Mr Kagame’s economic achievements outweigh his repressive methods will rumble on. But it risks obscuring how, especially after M23’s withdrawal from Goma in 2012, he underwent a third shift—into a leader who has taken advantage of a multipolar and transactional world to pursue his aims.Today only America rivals Qatar’s importance to Rwanda. The Gulf state has a 60% stake in the airport project and is negotiating an investment in Rwandair, the national airline. After Goma was retaken, the first meeting between Mr Kagame and Félix Tshisekedi, Congo’s president, took place in Doha. Rwanda exports gold, much of it smuggled from Congo, to the United Arab Emirates. Turkey, Russia and China equip the RDF with, respectively, drones, helicopters and artillery.Rwanda has perhaps the closest ties of any African country with Israel, a source of surveillance technology and another country shaped by genocide. Rwanda has been compared to Russia for its invasion of Congo. But its self-image is of an African Israel: small, tough and proud. “It’s strange to have African officials say they want to be just like us,” says an Israeli diplomat.At the same time Mr Kagame has found ways to be useful to the West beyond being the poster child for aid. The EU helps pay for the RDF’s mission to fight jihadists in Mozambique who threaten a gas project led by Total, the French energy giant. In 2024 the bloc signed a memorandum of understanding on critical minerals. Mr Kagame blunted the previous British government’s criticism of him by offering to take in migrants deported from Britain.Compared with 2012, Mr Kagame has been more defiant in the face of Western censure. The UN Security Council has told Rwanda to stop backing M23. The EU has sanctioned three Rwandan generals, including a commander in Mr Kagame’s inner circle, and a refinery in Kigali that the bloc says processes illicit gold from Congo. America has sanctioned a cabinet minister. Britain has cut some aid. Yet Mr Kagame said in April, at his annual speech to commemorate the genocide, that those sanctioning Rwanda could “go to hell”. When asked how much pain Rwanda will endure, one senior politician is fond of saying that “we will eat potatoes forever”.To what end? Mr Kagame’s allies emphasise his desire to protect Tutsis in the Kivus and to vanquish the FDLR, a Hutu militia with roots in the genocide that has collaborated with the Congolese army. To point out that the militia is of no serious threat to the RDF, arguably Africa’s strongest army, is beside the point, they say. It is the idea he wants to destroy, as much as the group. The culture of the RPF—a rebel movement that took a country and whose legitimacy is based on preventing a return to ethnic violence—produces a state of endless vigilance, or paranoia. Some in the RPF also imply support for a “Greater Rwanda” that transcends current boundaries. Dignitaries who visit Rwanda are given a presentation that begins with the impact of 19th-century colonial borders.Then there are the minerals dotted in the soil of eastern Congo. The region is rich in gold and the “3T” minerals important in electronics: tin, tungsten and tantalum. In 2024 Rwanda recorded bumper annual earnings from minerals. It exported $1.75bn-worth, up from about $500m in 2021. Though Rwanda has some mines of its own, the export figures also include smuggled minerals from Congo. The RDF part-owns tin and gold smelters, notes Jason Stearns of New York University.Whatever the mix of factors, Rwanda sees the Kivus as in its sphere of influence. And when it feels that influence is under threat it acts. In 2021 Mr Tshisekedi invited Burundi and Uganda into eastern Congo on the grounds of wanting their help rooting out militias. Mr Kagame saw these invitations as a threat to his interests, “so he flicked the switch: M23”, says a friend. With diplomatic efforts to end the conflict flagging and Mr Trump back in the White House, he seems to have taken the chance to escalate things.The conflict has weakened Mr Tshisekedi. Having said it would not talk directly to M23, Mr Tshisekedi’s government is now doing just that. The Congo River Alliance, a political coalition led by M23, says it wants regime change in Kinshasa, Congo’s capital. Joseph Kabila, son of Laurent and Mr Tshisekedi’s predecessor, reportedly arrived in Goma on May 26th, sparking speculation that he is plotting a comeback. “If Tshisekedi went, there would be no tears in Kigali,” says the friend of Mr Kagame’s. That person insists that Rwanda does not want a repeat of 1997, with a march on Kinshasa and a coup d’état. But the RPF hopes that the political cascade it has caused in the Congo will help its allies within the country. The aim of some in the party is to ensure at least that the Kivus gain more devolution as part of a federal Congo.Creating facts on the ground to gain leverage is typical of Rwanda’s president, according to one admirer, who describes him as “Africa’s Clausewitz”. For Mr Kagame, like the Prussian general, war is the continuation of politics by other means.But Mr Kagame faces a new challenge: Mr Trump. After M23 took Goma Mr Tshisekedi made America an offer that many African leaders have previously served up: my resources for your protection. (He is believed to have offered the same to others, including Russia and the UAE.) He wanted American support in exchange for access to minerals. Mr Tshisekedi appeared on Fox News. “We would be very happy to have our American friends here,” he said.To help its case Congo has welcomed initiatives by American firms. In April KoBold Metals, an American mining firm, said it was expanding into the country by taking over a lithium mine. In May a ban on Elon Musk’s Starlink was lifted. Erik Prince, a Trump supporter who used to head Blackwater, a private security firm known for its controversial work in Iraq, has reportedly struck a deal with Kinshasa to help it tackle copper-smuggling.America has no interest in sending actual soldiers to Congo. But it wants minerals. And Mr Trump no doubt likes the idea of claiming credit for a big, beautiful peace deal. So in April Massad Boulos, a senior adviser on Africa, and father-in-law to Mr Trump’s youngest daughter, visited the Great Lakes. His emphasis on business rather than human rights went down well. He has insisted, though, that Rwanda must stop supporting M23 and withdraw the RDF soldiers that are helping the militia. (The UN reckons there are between 3,000 and 4,000 of them in eastern Congo.)On April 25th Marco Rubio, America’s secretary of state, hosted the foreign ministers of Congo and Rwanda. They signed a “declaration of principles” that America hopes will lead to a formal peace deal next month. Both want the other to move first: Congo wants M23 and Rwanda out of the Kivus; Rwanda wants to know FDLR will be quashed. Nevertheless, the administration in Washington hopes that self-interest on all sides may produce peace. The message from Mr Trump is: why fight when we can all make money instead?Rwanda, which is 1/88th the size of Congo and has far fewer mineral resources, is trying to please the peace-broker. Ahead of Mr Boulos’s visit M23 withdrew from Walikale, the site of an American tin mine. Rwanda is—with some irony—pitching itself as the place where Congolese minerals can be transparently processed, cleaning up supply chains used by American tech firms. In May Trinity Metals, a firm operating in Rwanda whose major shareholder, Tech Met, has received investment from the American government (and recently hosted a critical-minerals dinner party at Mar-a-Lago), signed a letter of intent to export tin with an American processor. Later that month Mr Kagame visited one of its mines. Rwanda is also offering to host migrants deported from America. Rwandan officials contrast the grip Mr Kagame has on his country with the weak hold that Mr Tshisekedi has on Congo.Mr Kagame will want to avoid any deal that ties his hands. Having spent blood and treasure in eastern Congo, he will be reluctant to relinquish his gains. He may reasonably hope that Mr Trump will have little interest in monitoring what happens after any deal is struck.But there is a risk of hubris. M23 is already facing problems running Goma, where cash is in short supply. Its leaders say they will run the city like the RPF runs Kigali, but they have neither the skill nor the legitimacy among the population. On June 3rd HRW said M23 had systematically killed civilians in Goma.Then there is the mounting cost of the war. Rwanda does not disclose how many soldiers have died in this latest conflict but fatalities may be in the hundreds. Taking control of mining assets can help M23 pay its own way but it will not cover all the costs. In March Moody’s, a credit-rating agency, revised its outlook for Rwandan bonds to negative, in part because of the war. The IMF is warning of rising public debt. If tourism, the main source of foreign exchange, suffers, there could be balance-of-payments problems. Also at stake is arguably Mr Kagame’s most valuable asset—Brand Rwanda. Though businesspeople in Kigali do not openly criticise the regime, they hint at their deepening concern.Mr Kagame faces a fateful decision. Since 2012 he has peppered his speeches with the idea of agaciro, a Kinyarwanda word meaning “dignity” or “self-reliance”. To outsiders these bootstrappy exhortations can seem banal. But in Rwanda, where the genocide is the overwhelming context for national life, the message resonates. For Mr Kagame the chief lessons of the 1990s are that you cannot rely on outsiders and that a lack of freedom is a price worth paying for security. He is terrified that younger Rwandans will forget these lessons, says a diplomat.Dealing with the unpredictable Mr Trump will complicate things even for a seasoned operator like Mr Kagame. Maybe the cynical master of power politics will have to choose between two legacy projects: control in Congo and modernisation at home. Vision 1994 or Vision 2050. ■Sign up to the Analysing Africa, a weekly newsletter that keeps you in the loop about the world’s youngest—and least understood—continent.