Britain - Britain’s ambitious plan to rearm looks underfunded

Many of the new capabilities will not show up for years. Editor’s note (June 2nd): This article has been updated.IF THERE IS one thing that Britain’s political parties agree on, it is that British defences are broken. The armed forces were “hollowed-out…overstretched and under-equipped”, acknowledged Ben Wallace, then defence secretary, in 2023. John Healey, his Labour successor, speaking last year, agreed: “What we’ve not been ready to do is to fight.”On June 2nd the government published a “root and branch” defence review that was a year in the making. The 140-page strategic defence review (SDR) was written by three outside figures led by George Robertson, a former British defence secretary and NATO secretary-general. They handed a first document to ministers in December. Several drafts later, and after vicious battles with the Treasury, it was launched by Sir Keir Starmer, the prime minister, in Scotland. All 62 of the review’s recommendations have been accepted.Its central conclusion is simple: British forces, and society, must move decisively to “warfighting readiness”. America is likely to shift military forces from Europe to Asia, it notes. Britain’s “long-standing assumptions about global power balances and structures are no longer certain”. It proposes a campaign to explain the threats to the British public, and a Defence Readiness bill that would allow the government to mobilise reserves and industry in case of a larger war, alongside other measures to increase civilian and military resilience.The review does not set out a detailed order of battle—that will come in later documents—but makes a handful of big commitments. Britain will buy “up to” a dozen future SSN-AUKUS attack submarines, a marked increase from the current Astute-class fleet, which is capped at seven. It raises the possibility that the Royal Air Force might buy F-35A jets, which are cheaper and can fly farther than the current carrier-capable F-35Bs.More important, they can also carry nuclear bombs. The review recommends that Britain should open discussions with America and NATO on taking part in the alliance’s nuclear sharing, in which European air forces practise delivering American B61 bombs. Less dramatic, but no less important, is the recommendation that Britain should develop offensive anti-satellite weapons.The review also begins to tackle areas of critical weakness. The level of ammunition stockpiles “would make your hair stand on end”, noted Sir Patrick Sanders, a general, last year. The government will now invest £1.5bn ($2bn) to build at least six new factories for munitions and “energetics” that go inside them. The idea is that these will form the basis of what the review describes as an “always on” capability, which could be scaled up in wartime to compensate for losses.The most important aspects of the review are less about hardware than reforms. The upper echelons of defence have been reshuffled to empower the chief of defence staff and create a powerful new national armaments director. A new cyber and electromagnetic command will oversee the protection of military networks and electronic warfare. Procurement will be overhauled “from top to the bottom”, with details to come in a defence industrial strategy this year. A “Defence Uncrewed Systems Centre” is to be established by February 2026, aimed at pushing drones into front-line units across all three services more quickly.More broadly, the review endorses a change in the way that Britain should fight. “It is through dynamic networks of crewed, uncrewed, and autonomous assets and data flows,” it argues, rather than simply numbers of troops and platforms, “that lethality and military effect are now created.” Encouragingly, it acknowledges that previous efforts to create a “digital targeting web” to knit together sensors, weapons and commanders have failed, and proposes new ways to bring one about by 2027. It promises, vaguely, that the army will eventually become “10x more lethal”.The review acknowledges that the European Union is of “increasing significance” in defence matters and that the bloc might “complement nato’s role”. But there is not even a hint that Britain fears a rupture with America. The Anglo-American defence relationship is “unlike any other”, says the review, noting that British military activity is “underpinned” by the Five Eyes intelligence alliance.Some awkward questions are left unaddressed. There is little on expanding missile defence over British soil, which is largely non-existent. If Britain does buy F-35As, it could eat into future orders for the next-generation jet produced as part of the Global Combat Air Programme (GCAP), a joint project with Italy and Japan. Some of the announcements also appear to be recycled from past pledges. Only half of the £4bn for autonomous systems is new money, for instance. The government’s promise of £15bn for a new warhead refers to money that was privately committed in budget planning long ago. The £1.5bn for ammo factories will not go as far as it might seem. Internal estimates suggest that Britain would need to spend approximately £8bn to replenish its ammunition stockpiles to meet the demands of a high-intensity war.Murkier still, and more troubling, is the broader question of defence spending. The Treasury has privately estimated that for Britain to fully meet its commitments to the AUKUS submarine deal, GCAP and nuclear-related projects would require spending between 3% and 3.5% of GDP on defence. In February the government committed to the rather more feeble target of 2.5% of GDP by 2027, a 0.2 percentage-point increase from the current level, and 3% only in the next parliament (ie, before 2034), and then, too, with caveats. Crucially, that appears not to have changed. On June 1st the Ministry of Defence said that the 3% target remained an “ambition” for the next parliament, and only “when economic and fiscal conditions allow”.That timeline raises several problems. The Treasury tends to ignore spending commitments beyond the planning window for the Office of Budgetary Responsibility, which runs to 2029-30. A nine-year timeline for hitting the 3% target is also close to the upper estimates of how long it would take Russia to rebuild its armed forces to a size and level where they might feel capable of attacking NATO. Germany’s top general has suggested that Russia might reach that point as early as 2029, by which time America might have pulled some forces out of Europe. Yet many of the review’s recommendations would yield new capabilities only in the 2030s.That could change. NATO defence ministers, who met in Brussels on June 4th, are close to agreeing on a new 3.5% spending target, which would be announced at the NATO summit in The Hague in three weeks’ time. The real debate is over the deadline—early 2030s or later in the decade—and whether there should be annual targets for incremental growth, to encourage allies to front-load cash.For now, Mr Healey appears to have lost his battle with the Treasury. In a foreword to the review, Mr Healey says that the government will produce £6bn in savings. Such claims should be taken with a pinch of salt. The result is a plan that has great potential to revive British military power, but could fall short of the “genuinely transformative” review promised by Lord Robertson last month. ■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in Britain, sign up to Blighty, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.