Middle East & Africa - Kurdish armed groups are laying down their weapons

In a changing Middle East, for some talking seems more promising than fighting. FOR much of the past century, as the Kurds dreamed of autonomy in Turkey and the Middle East, armed groups drove the agenda. Abdullah Ocalan, the jailed leader of the largest such group, the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK), wielded influence across Turkey, Iran, Iraq and Syria. Now, though, he says it is time for the guns to fall silent. “There is no alternative to democracy in the pursuit and realisation of a political system,” he said in February. After months of secret negotiations with Turkey, he called for the PKK to disband.On May 12th, the group said it would comply. That could mark the end of one of the world’s longest conflicts: its fight with the Turkish state lasted more than four decades and claimed 40,000 lives. Meanwhile the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF), an American-backed group that includes the PKK’s Syrian proxy, said it would integrate its fighters into Syria’s new army (Turkey has since accused it of not being serious).Both announcements mark a big shift in Kurdish strategy. Kurds hope that relinquishing their arms will help them negotiate for safety and political freedoms. Not everyone agrees with the new approach. Negotiations have failed in the past. But some of the disputes that scuttled past efforts may no longer be obstacles.The Kurdish shift comes partly out of necessity. Turkish drones have battered the PKK in northern Iraq in recent years. The fall of the Assad regime in Syria left the SDF vulnerable to attacks by the so-called Syrian National Army, a coalition of Turkish-backed militias. They can no longer rely on America’s help, either: it has already withdrawn several hundred of its 2,000 troops from north-east Syria, and Donald Trump is keen to pull out the rest.If they are weaker on the battlefield, the Kurds still hold negotiating clout. President Recep Tayyip Erdogan wants to expand Turkey’s influence in post-Assad Syria. A dialogue with the PKK could win him favour with Syrian Kurds, and may help him woo them away from Israel, which has tried to court the Kurds and other minority groups in Syria. Hakan Fidan, Turkey’s foreign minister, has warned that the alternative in Syria is “internal strife that would threaten Turkey’s stability”.Closer to home, Mr Erdogan also wants the support of Kurdish MPs in Turkey, amid talk that he may seek to change the constitution and allow himself to run again in the next presidential election.The latest move is by no means the first attempt to solve the conflict. The most recent peace process, which included a two-year truce, collapsed in 2015 partly because Mr Erdogan’s party lost its majority in a general election. Some Kurds fear that the latest effort will be similarly short-lived.Sceptics point out that hundreds of members of Turkey’s biggest Kurdish party, the Peoples’ Equality and Democracy Party (DEM), have been arrested or removed from office since 2016. That is part of a broader trend of democratic backsliding under an increasingly authoritarian Mr Erdogan, who has spent years trying to destroy his opposition.Yet there is reason to think this time could be different. For one thing, Mr Erdogan and his coalition partners are on the same page: it was the nationalists who urged negotiations with Mr Ocalan in the first place. Nor is Syria a point of disagreement any more. With the Assad regime gone, Turkey and the Kurds agree that a settlement would help stabilise Syria.Some 400 Kurdish delegates from Turkey, Iraq and Syria gathered at a recent unity conference on the Syria-Turkey border to discuss plans for co-operation. Since the SDF’s accord with Ahmed al-Sharaa, Syria’s president, normalisation of relations has progressed. On June 2nd the SDF and the government swapped 470 prisoners. Kurds are working with the Syrian government to facilitate the return of Kurds who fled Afrin, a Kurdish city in north-west Syria, which the Turkish army and its proxies captured in 2018 (see map). The SDF hopes it may be able to bargain for a federal arrangement similar to the Kurds’ semi-autonomy in Iraq, though Mr Erdogan, who wields considerable influence in Syria, is likely to scupper such a plan.The PKK’s decision to disband was broadly welcomed by Kurds in Turkey, who saw it as a profound change. Besides, after so many years underground, the PKK was becoming less relevant. Pollsters say most Kurds feel closer to political parties and leaders like Selahattin Demirtas, an imprisoned former head of the DEM.They hope negotiations with Mr Erdogan will bring tangible benefits, such as an amnesty for political prisoners and more power for local government. “People do not trust the talks, but they trust people who represent them,” says Reha Ruhavioglu, director of the Kurdish Studies Centre in the south-eastern city of Diyarbakir. “They have faith that representatives will stand up for their rights and freedoms.” ■Sign up to the Middle East Dispatch, a weekly newsletter that keeps you in the loop on a fascinating, complex and consequential part of the world.