Britain - A ruling in Britain stokes fears of backdoor blasphemy laws 

Concerns over a case involving the burning of a Koran. It takes a lot to get religious lobby groups to agree with the National Secular Society (NSS). But such an alliance has emerged since Hamit Coskun was convicted on June 2nd of a religiously motivated public-order offence after setting fire to a Koran. He was fined £240 ($325).On February 13th Mr Coskun had stood outside the Turkish consulate in London, holding a burning Koran aloft while shouting “Islam is the religion of terrorists”. He was attacked by a man brandishing a large knife who said he was going to kill him, and kicked by a passing delivery man. The whole encounter was filmed and circulated on social media.The Crown Prosecution Service at first charged Mr Coskun with an offence against “the religious institution of Islam”. Critics said this amounted to a charge of blasphemy. (England abolished its blasphemy laws in 2008.) Mr Coskun was eventually convicted for “disorderly behaviour within the hearing or sight of a person likely to be caused harassment, alarm or distress”. Judge John McGarva did not accept Mr Coskun’s claim that his dispute was with Islam, ruling that he was “motivated at least in part by a hatred of Muslims”. Stephen Evans of the NSS said the verdict suggests “a troubling repurposing of public-order laws as a proxy for blasphemy laws”.  Mr Coskun himself asked, “Would I have been prosecuted if I’d set fire to a copy of the Bible outside Westminster Abbey?”The ruling said the proof of Mr Coskun’s disorderly conduct was “that it led to serious public disorder involving him being assaulted by two different people”.  Tim Dieppe of Christian Concern, a lobby group, says that is “victim blaming” and amounts to an argument that “because some Muslims are prone to violence if their religion is insulted, the police will enforce protection of their religion.”Miqdaad Versi, of the Muslim Council of Britain (MCB), insisted the ruling is “about public order and hate-crime laws, not silencing free speech or protecting any one religion”. Neither the MCB nor most British Muslims, he says, are calling for blasphemy to be a criminal offence.Mr Coskun is appealing against the conviction. His supporters have urged him to be careful. Salwan Momika, an Iraqi refugee in Sweden, who burned a Koran in public in 2023, was shot dead in January at his home in Stockholm. ■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in Britain, sign up to Blighty, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.