Europe - The hard-right’s champion blows up the Dutch government

Geert Wilders won an election but bails without getting much done. GEERT WILDERS has been trying to ride anti-immigrant sentiment to the top of Dutch politics ever since he founded his Party for Freedom (PVV) in 2006. In an election in 2023 the hard-right populist finally succeeded, finishing first with 23.5% of the vote. His party became the biggest in government, though led by a compromise prime minister rather than by Mr Wilders. The PVV leader promised the toughest asylum policy ever, cheaper health-care and various other boons. But as the months went by, almost none of his pledges came to fruition. Some were stranded in ministries or the courts; others fell to budget concerns. On June 3rd Mr Wilders pulled the plug on the coalition he had dominated, complaining that other parties had sabotaged his immigration plans.The PVV had been sliding in the polls, from 33% in early 2024 to about 20% in May. Mr Wilders’s furious coalition partners accused him of blowing up the government as a political stunt. Dilan Yesilgoz, leader of the centre-right Liberals (VVD), called it “super-irresponsible”. On May 26th, at a surprise press conference, Mr Wilders unveiled ten demands for tougher asylum policy, including poorly worked-out notions such as deploying the army at the border. In meetings over the past two days he insisted the other parties sign on. When they asked him to first work out the details and present his proposals to parliament, he brought down the cabinet. In typically apocalyptic language, he said he had been elected to stop asylum-seekers, not to facilitate “the downfall of the Netherlands”.The country is almost certainly headed for fresh elections. Any alternative coalition would need to include the large Labour-GreenLeft party, but its leader, Frans Timmermans, has ruled that out. In the meantime Dick Schoof, the non-partisan prime minister, will stay on in his job, along with most of the current ministers; the PVV’s ministers have resigned. Lack of a governing majority will complicate the Netherlands’ position when it hosts the NATO summit on June 24th-25th in The Hague, where the lame-duck Mr Schoof will be expected to pledge huge increases in defence spending.The outgoing Dutch government was the farthest-right one since the second world war. To some extent its collapse can be ascribed to Mr Wilders’s peculiarities. He is the sole registered member of the PVV, and entirely controls its MPs and staff. That has kept the party from building up skilled cadres. It was Mr Wilders’s own pick for immigration minister, the inexperienced and obstinate Marjolein Faber, who failed to get her boss’s asylum policies implemented, clashing constantly with parliament, mayors and civil servants.Mr Wilders has had a reputation as a bad partner since 2012, when he brought down the first cabinet of Mark Rutte, the long-serving prime minister from the VVD, rather than share responsibility for unpopular austerity measures. (He had supported it in a confidence and supply deal.) Mr Rutte vowed never to collaborate with him again, but Ms Yesilgoz lifted that cordon sanitaire in 2023. She has now resurrected Mr Rutte’s favourite epithet for the PVV leader: wegloper, or someone who walks away. Others were harsher still. Mona Keijzer, the minister of housing, accused Mr Wilders of “betraying the Netherlands”.Yet in other ways the PVV’s difficulties in governing recall those of other populist parties across Europe. Giorgia Meloni, Italy’s hard-right prime minister, saw her plan to deport asylum-seekers to processing camps in Albania struck down by judges. Her promises to move Italy towards a presidential system have gone nowhere. Sweden’s populist Sweden Democrats have pushed immigration and climate policy modestly rightwards, but those policies are implemented by the centre-right Moderates whose government they back from the outside; they are not in the cabinet themselves. On June 1st Polish voters elected a hard-right presidential candidate, Karol Nawrocki, but the main effect will be to stymie the centrist government through his power of veto.Hard-right parties can transform countries when they have an absolute majority and are not checked by other branches of government, as in Hungary under Viktor Orban or in Poland from 2015-23. That is not possible in the Netherlands’ fragmented political landscape, with 15 parties in parliament. Besides the PVV and VVD, the outgoing cabinet included New Social Contract, a centrist party focused on governance reform, and the small agrarian Farmer-Citizen Movement, whose chief mission is to relax European Union limits on pollution from farms. Those parties floundered in government as well, and polls show that new elections would nearly wipe them out.As Dutch politics shifts back into campaign mode, the main action will be between the VVD, the PVV and Labour-GreenLeft. Mr Wilders will try to deflect blame for the government’s failures and return the focus to immigration, the issue where his party is the strongest. “He will try to create a narrative that it was the established parties and elite institutions that made it impossible for him to get things done,” says Sarah de Lange, a political scientist at the University of Amsterdam. Mr Timmermans, the sole big player on the left, must decide whether to run mainly against the PVV or the VVD.To see what the legacy of the Netherlands’ first government to include the PVV will be, watch Ms Yesilgoz. As the leader of the biggest mainstream conservative party, she will decide whether or not to marginalise Mr Wilders again, and hence whether future governments move back to the centre or cement the shift to the hard right. She must also contend with the resurgence of the centre-right Christian Democrats, just to her left. “The VVD used to be the gatekeepers between the traditional order and the right-wing radicals,” says Mark Thiessen, a columnist and former VVD strategist. Since Ms Yesilgoz took over the party, “they’ve become the bridge.” ■To stay on top of the biggest European stories, sign up to Café Europa, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.