Business - How managing energy demand got glamorous

Technology and power come together. The shed, a glittering cultural centre in Manhattan’s Hudson Yards where Ralph Fiennes and Sir Kenneth Branagh have graced the stage, hosted an unlikely gathering of utility and technology bosses on May 29th. They were there not for Shakespeare, but for something as dramatic in its own way. The event celebrated Mercury, a new effort led by the Electric Power Research Institute (epri), an industry body, to create interoperability standards for “micropower” devices inspired by the Bluetooth technology that revolutionised consumer electronics. It will allow such things as electric-vehicle (ev) chargers, heat pumps, solar panels, smart thermostats and residential batteries to communicate seamlessly with electricity grids.Days earlier, nrg Energy, a big American utility, announced the purchase of cpower, a pioneer in “virtual power plants”. Because VPPs aggregate and manage many small dispersed sources of electricity (like the micropower devices Mercury will connect) to act as one large power plant, they can help balance supply and demand remotely. cpower’s micropower units together produce over 6 gigawatts (gw), as much peak power as six nuclear plants.When power grids approach peak demand and big generators cannot cope, vpps can ease that crunch by harnessing distributed power. In Australia, Tesla is connecting 50,000 homes with solar panels and big batteries to form the world’s biggest vpp. Next Kraftwerke has stitched together thousands of biogas facilities, hydropower plants and solar units in Germany to operate flexibly and so take advantage of price spikes on electricity markets.The theatrical announcement and big acquisition are straws in the wind. Demand-side approaches to managing energy have been disregarded in the past, but no longer. That’s because they are becoming a big business: revenues are forecast to grow globally at over 12% a year from $35bn in 2025 to $127bn by 2035, according to Future Market Insights, a research firm, with China and India leading the way (see chart 1).America’s Department of Energy reckons that distributed-energy resources have leapt from 14gw in 2019 to 142gw last year, and look to exceed 320gw by 2028 (see chart 2). Battery-powered vehicles could be a valuable source of flexible energy. Eurelectric, an industry body, and ey, a consultancy, reckon that the capacity of evs in Europe will be enough to power 30m homes for a year by 2030 and over a tenth of Europe’s power needs by 2040.The overall potential could be huge. Centre for Net Zero, a think-tank, reckons that such flexibility could unlock up to 7% of total demand or 30% from peak demand in Britain. But why are these techniques taking off now after previous false starts? The answer lies in a combination of booming electricity demand and technological innovation that is forcing utilities to reconsider their supply-side bias.Consider first the demand shock. Over the past two decades, demand for electricity in developed economies was essentially flat. Now, propelled by data centres serving the computational needs of artificial intelligence (ai), advanced manufacturing and digitisation, it is taking off. icf, a consultancy, projects that American electricity consumption could grow by 25% by 2030 and 78% by 2050.Utilities would customarily respond by building big power plants. They still want to, but red tape, nimbyism and supply-chain snags are making it harder and costlier. vpps can quickly aggregate existing idle assets. Because power grids are built for extreme stress occurring for just a few hours every year, many have plenty of spare capacity. A study by Duke University found that American grids could potentially handle 76-126gw of new load without adding giant power plants if new data centers were designed so that they could be cut off from grid power during peak periods for only up to 1% of the time. Though clean energy is out of favour with Donald Trump’s administration, demand response still attracts bipartisan support. Glenn Youngkin, the Republican governor of Virginia (the state with the biggest ai power consumption by far), recently signed legislation mandating certain vpps and calling for new electric school buses to be capable of feeding power back into the grid.One reason is economics. Calvin Butler, boss of America’s Exelon, a giant power utility with over 10m customers, observes that residential-demand programmes that, for example, might allow a utility to automatically lower the air conditioning in your home remotely during a grid peak period, such as a money-saving scheme run by an affiliate in Baltimore, “are highly popular with customers”. Another reason is resilience. A report by Citigroup, a bank, argues that demand response could not only help stabilise grids, but also save money and reduce emissions “as it cuts reliance on fossil-fuel plants that do not need to be called up during peak demand”.Another reason is the importance of reliable electricity supplies to power America’s ai boom. The coming demand crunch was the hottest topic at a gathering in New Orleans of utility bosses organised by the Edison Electric Institute (eei), which represents America’s private-sector power utilities. Two of the main speakers were the bosses of buzzy technology firms involved in both ai and demand management.Safra Catz, the ceo of Oracle, told the crowd, “You are the gatekeepers for the availability of ai.” Her firm is one of the biggest energy buyers among big tech. Along with Openai and SoftBank, it is developing Stargate, an ai mega-project in Texas. It also provides software to manage energy demand to utilities globally. The firm reckons that use of its platform has saved $890m for Exelon and its customers.Also at the gathering was Greg Jackson of Britain’s Octopus Energy, a privately held power utility with a valuation approaching $10bn. It aggregates over 2gw-worth of energy from 300,000 micropower devices like evs and heat pumps. Kraken, its tech affiliate, provides software enabling flexible-energy offerings at over a dozen utilities worldwide. Other innovators are rushing in. Emerald ai, an American startup, recently showed it can cut power use at ai data centres with software to manipulate computational loads without meaningful loss of performance.The economic logic is compelling. Con Edison, a utility in New York, put off a $1.2bn substation upgrade by spending just $200m on distributed-energy resources. Utility officials in states confronting years-long backlogs of projects awaiting grid connection are considering prioritising customers capable of shifting demand. “If you can be flexible, you’ll be able to go to the head of the queue for grid connections,” predicts Varun Sivaram, Emerald ai’s founder. Thanks to the coming power squeeze, demand management at last looks set to soar.■