Britain - A new London attraction hopes to revive interest in Elvis

At “Elvis Evolution”, the king of rock ’n’ roll ain’t dead. London’s Royal Docks once hummed with the commerce of empire. Today they have a new buzz and a new name: “Immerse LDN”, a collection of interactive entertainment attractions. The area lures tourists and tech nerds who come to enjoy virtual reality—and, soon, Elvis Presley.The much-anticipated star of this revived neighbourhood is to be “Elvis Evolution”, a walk-through exhibition of the king of rock ’n’ roll, due to open in July. The attraction will bring together two of London’s talent pools: West End actors and East End technologists. The result is a multisensory extravaganza that promises to take punters on a journey through Presley’s music, fashion and favourite foods, culminating in a serenade by a human-sized hologram of the singer. Layered Reality, the firm behind it, hopes the wizzy tech will help introduce a classic artist to the young while catering to the nostalgia of the old.Unlike “ABBA Voyage”, which stuck motion sensors on the band’s (living) members to create hologrammatic representations of their younger selves, the makers of “Elvis Evolution” had no flesh and blood to work with. Instead they used AI to project Presley, with his mannerisms and movements, based on thousands of photos and videos.Immersive experiences are having a moment. Also on offer in Docklands are an Egyptology show centred on Tutankhamun, an escape-room-style activity based on Netflix’s series “Squid Game” and a “Friends”-themed homage to NBC’s sitcom. The British immersive-tech market, encompassing virtual, augmented and mixed reality, reached £1.06bn ($1.35bn) in 2024 and is expected to grow to £6.24bn by 2033, according to iMarc, a market-research firm.“Elvis Evolution” may eventually rock up in other cities: Layered Reality talks of Berlin, Paris and (of course) Las Vegas. The technology behind it has wider potential. For smaller venues or markets unable to attract headline acts, the AI-enabled model offers an affordable alternative, through a digital proxy. Who says Taylor Swift could never play Newton Abbot? Layered Reality’s CEO, Andrew McGuinness, says that two artists have already approached the company about a possible collaboration—one in the twilight of their career, the other in their prime.The West End needn’t fear east London’s upstarts, and modern rockers shouldn’t worry about competing with AI ghosts. There’s ample room for both. Video, after all, didn’t kill the radio star.■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in Britain, sign up to Blighty, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.