Britain - Manchester’s Town Hall renovation will be late, costly and worth it

An age of endless discovery. “It’s a beautiful thing to behold,” says Paul Candelent, looking across the roof of Manchester Town Hall. Unfortunately, Mr Candelent, who is overseeing the renovation of the building, is not talking about the edifice itself—although that, too, is a marvel. He means the scaffolding that has enveloped it for rather too long.When Manchester Town Hall opened in 1877 it was not just a magnificent ornament for a confident city. It also proclaimed to Britain and the rest of the world that wealth is created by industry and free trade. On its floors are images of worker bees and cotton flowers, evoking the material that made the metropolis rich. Its sculpture gallery contained busts of the Anti-Corn Law MPs John Bright and Richard Cobden, which have been temporarily removed for safe keeping.Other British cities put up similarly showy edifices in the second half of the 19th century, often in neo-Gothic style (like Manchester Town Hall) or neoclassical. With typical brashness, Manchester resolved to create a hall that would be “equal if not superior, to any similar building in the country at any cost which may be reasonably required”. It would not be outdone in any way. Sheffield had recently taken delivery of an organ by the French master Aristide Cavaillé-Coll. Manchester Town Hall had to have an organ by Aristide Cavaillé-Coll.Perhaps Manchester’s town hall is no grander than those of rival cities like Leeds and Liverpool. But it is more fanciful and more fun. Ceilings are painted with stars, or decorated with mosaic glass. The roof is interrupted by steeply pitched gables and turrets; the interior courtyard is a riot of architectural styles. Tracey Cartledge, who has repaired some of the building’s roughly 4,000 square metres of mosaic, calls it “a fairy-tale palace”.Her ministrations, and those of many other craftsmen and women, were badly needed. By the time the town hall closed for repair, in 2018, large parts of it had become unsafe and unusable. The Carrara marble on the floors was worn through in places. The roof leaked. Stained-glass windows were buckling under their own weight. And much of the interior was in need of cleaning or repainting.Some of the renovations are drastic. The whole roof, which has a surface of more than 5,000 square metres, is being refurbished with thick Cumbrian slate. But the workers are not trying to turn Manchester Town Hall pristine. Scrubbing the entire exterior might have made it look like a pastiche, says Mr Candelent. Better to keep some of “that Manchester grime—140 years of soot”.Other cities have transformed their great civic buildings into hotels, events spaces and tourist attractions. Manchester is preserving its town hall as a town hall. After the renovation is completed, all being well in August 2026, coroners and registrars will move in, along with some councillors and staff. Five new lifts are being installed to bring the building up to date as an office complex.Need it be spelled out that the renovation of the town hall and the adjoining Albert Square is over budget and behind schedule? The city council originally budgeted £305m ($410m at today’s rate). It now expects to spend £429m. Manchester Town Hall was built in nine years, although some fine murals by Ford Madox Brown were not finished until later. It will be closed for renovation for almost as long.Some of the delay and increased cost is a result of covid-19 and the nationwide surge in construction prices that followed the peak of the pandemic. Another cause is what builders call “discovery”, often meaning nasty surprises. Many of the gutters around Manchester Town Hall looked fine through binoculars and drone cameras. Once the scaffolding was up, and workers could inspect them more closely, they turned out not to be.The original builders left no detailed plans, so there was much to discover. A tunnel was revealed. One chimney was found to rise through the building, turn 90 degrees, run under the great hall, then rise again. Because the town hall is protected, such revelations force the architects to draw new plans and submit them for approval. Every delay costs money.Still, the project has created more than 300 jobs and 170-odd apprenticeships—a boon to a city that can no longer claim to be among Britain’s richest. Jon Greenough of Greenough & Sons, a roofing firm, says that the conditions in Manchester, where workers are protected from the elements, has enticed young people into the trade. (His firm is also working on the Old College in Aberystwyth, where the wind tears in from the Atlantic.)And the craftsmen and women can be proud of their work. The renovation of Manchester Town Hall will take too long, cost too much, and create something of great beauty. It is a common combination. Great buildings that define cities are not cheap—think of François Mitterrand’s grands projets, or the Sydney Opera House. The visual result is what people remember.When the town hall reopens, attention may turn to another great Victorian neo-Gothic building, to the south. The Palace of Westminster is in an awful state. It costs around £100m a year to patch up, and needs a complete overhaul. That could proceed more quickly if the politicians agreed to move out. Much of this has been known for decades, but decisions are put off and put off again. A bit of Mancunian industriousness is needed in London.■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in Britain, sign up to Blighty, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.