Finance & economics - Trump thinks Americans consume too much. He has a point

He will not like the remedy, however. Rebalancing the global economy is Donald Trump’s defining cause. China should produce less and consume more, the president thinks; meanwhile, America should produce more by reindustrialising. There is a final logical step to this equation: America should also consume less.Such abstemiousness is unavoidable if MAGA-maths is to add up, as even the administration admits. Scott Bessent, the treasury secretary, calls for “less consumption”; more floridly, Mr Trump says his trade war might result in children having “two dolls instead of 30”. As J.D. Vance, the vice-president, puts it: “A million cheap, knock-off toasters aren’t worth the price of a single American manufacturing job.”The belief that America consumes too much has been building for decades. Left-wing types decry America’s consumer culture. In the 2000s, before the global financial crisis, some economists characterised Americans as gorging themselves on low long-term interest rates. In 2010 Glenn Hubbard, a technocratic Republican, teamed up with an obscure Democrat called Peter Navarro to argue that “boosting the American saving rate should be part of our national economic overall trade policy.” Mr Navarro would later switch parties; today, he is Mr Trump’s trade guru.To see how over-consumption and trade are linked, consider what happens when a country consumes beyond its means: it must borrow from abroad. These financial flows are the flip side of the trade deficit, hated by Mr Trump. It is as if shipping containers arrive in America, unload goods, and then sail back filled with Treasury bills or shares in S&P 500 companies. Mr Trump wants the trade deficit to close, meaning that the financial flows must slow, too. But he also wants America to enjoy an investment boom. The only way to make the equation add up is if America ponies up its own capital by saving more. In other words, it must cut its consumption.It is not crazy to seek such a rebalancing. America’s gross domestic savings are around 17% of GDP, compared with an average of 23% in high-income countries. America invests about 22% of GDP, roughly in line with the rich-world average. The difference between saving and investment is the capital the country must import, which last year amounted to $1.3trn. Meanwhile, America’s consumption as a share of GDP—81% once that by the government is included—is the highest in the G7 apart from Britain. Among the other five big rich economies, the consumption share is on average five percentage points lower.Relying on net capital inflows has left America with deep financial obligations to foreigners. The difference between the assets that Americans own overseas and those foreigners own in America has fallen to -90% of GDP. This is the kind of “net international investment position” (NIIP) that would be hair-raising in almost any other country.For years America could take solace from the fact that its income statement was healthy. Even as its NIIP worsened, the country earned more on its overseas assets than it paid out to foreign investors. Foreigners own lots of low-yielding debt, including Treasuries; Americans own more stocks and FDI, which have higher yields. The stubborn positivity of the country’s net foreign income has been part of the “exorbitant privilege” that comes from issuing the world’s reserve currency.Yet as the NIIP has lurched into the red, this comfort has dissipated. In the third quarter of 2024 America paid more to owners of its assets than it earned on foreign investments for the first time this century, in part because of higher interest rates.This is the grain of truth to Mr Trump’s claim that trade deficits transfer wealth overseas (the president also applies this logic, nonsensically, to bilateral trade with every foreign country). In textbook economics, persistent large current-account deficits slowly make a country less wealthy, the way a spendthrift household eventually finds itself poorer than a neighbour who spends little. In the harsh reality of the global economy, excessive current-account deficits can bring about sudden currency crises as foreign investors lose faith in a country’s ability to pay its debts.If America’s thirst for consumption cannot go on for ever, how long can it last? There have been two previous waves of alarm about America’s current account. In the 1980s, as the NIIP fell and in time turned negative, economists questioned how long it could go on. A very long time, it turned out. Then, in the early 2000s, when America’s current-account deficit surged, Ben Bernanke, later chairman of the Federal Reserve, pointed to a “glut” of savings abroad that were flowing into America. Many economists blamed this for a consumption binge and housing bubble. But the subprime mortgage crisis that followed was not a current-account crisis for America. Instead, the dollar strengthened.The country also benefits from some natural hedges. Because it borrows in its own currency, as the dollar declines—as it has this year—its NIIP improves. The same thing happens if its stockmarket falls. Indeed, one reason the NIIP has looked especially bad in recent years is Wall Street’s incredible bull run, which has pushed up the value of American assets owned by foreigners. And to the extent that foreign investment enables higher economic growth, everybody wins—even if foreigners take a slice of the pay-off.At the same time, there are reasons to think that things may now be different, and that the hedges may not be sufficient to prevent pain. Consider the views of economists outside the president’s orbit. Maurice Obstfeld, former chief economist of the IMF, likens a country’s trade balance to a government’s primary budget balance. There has to be at least the expectation that it will eventually move towards surplus to maintain confidence in the country’s ability to pay its foreign debts, he says. Peter Hooper of Deutsche Bank, a scholar of current-account issues since the 1980s, describes America’s persistent trade deficits as a chronic malaise, “like termites in the woodwork”. Joseph Gagnon of the Peterson Institute for International Economics, a think-tank, points out that no advanced economy has sustained a foreign-liability position as negative as America’s. “That begins to be worrisome,” he says.What would a current-account crisis look like? The $62trn-worth of American capital owned by foreigners is distributed across tens of millions of balance-sheets belonging to firms and individuals. A third is debt instruments that cannot be marked down as seamlessly as equity prices or property values; of that debt, two-fifths is government-issued. Moreover, since America’s debt liabilities are mostly denominated in dollars, it should always be able to honour them, at least in nominal terms.But a loss of faith in America’s ability to deliver the necessary real returns for foreign investors could cause a large depreciation in its asset prices, which have reached eye-watering highs. The country’s bonds, properties and stocks, as well as the dollar itself, would come under intense selling pressure. A much weaker dollar and lower prices for American bonds and stocks would force a rebalancing by reducing the size of America’s external liabilities relative to its external assets. Tighter financial conditions would discourage consumption, whipping the current account into line no matter how uncomfortable such a sudden adjustment would prove.The question for America, and indeed the global economy, is whether it can defuse its external liabilities without paying such a steep price. Mr Trump’s solution is to pull up the drawbridge. Tariffs discourage consumption by raising prices and hurting living standards. Barriers to capital mobility, the first signs of which are buried in Mr Trump’s tax bill, force up domestic interest rates and encourage domestic saving. But this solution is as bad as the disease. It makes Americans poorer, and by imperilling the returns earned by foreign investors, threatens to bring about the very crash rebalancing is supposed to prevent. The sharp but brief sell-off in April, after Mr Trump announced his global “reciprocal” tariffs, offered a preview of the possible dynamics of a crisis, argues Mr Gagnon.A smoother adjustment—one that does not seek to make America a creditor nation overnight—should be possible. If faith in the country is maintained, its exorbitant privilege means it ought to be able to repay its foreign debts with smaller trade surpluses than other countries, says Menzie Chinn of the University of Wisconsin-Madison. If America avoids sullying its own assets, it can afford to be gradual in its transition towards a trade surplus.To bring about an incremental transition, America must stop blaming foreigners. Mr Navarro thinks that other countries have fuelled America’s trade deficit by keeping their currencies artificially weak, propping up their exporters and blocking American goods from their markets. Stephen Miran, another adviser, points to America’s position as a magnet for financial flows from overseas, which inflates the value of the dollar and so depresses American exports. It has become increasingly fashionable to believe that global imbalances—notably, China’s excess savings—have forced overconsumption on America. One way they might do this is by artificially depressing global interest rates.But in America, a country that accounts for over a quarter of global GDP at market exchange rates, domestic forces almost always matter more than the foreign winds around them. Nobody forces the country to consume too much. And though it is impractical and undesirable to alter the consumption and savings decisions of millions of American households, there is one obvious lever to pull: cutting the enormous budget deficit of the federal government.It is this deficit—at 7% of GDP over the past year—that drives American overconsumption. When the government spends, it consumes, too; when it levies insufficient taxes, it encourages households to binge. Government debts soak up savings that could fund investment, helping produce the current-account deficit. In fact, America’s private sector last year saved enough to fund all its investment and more. The government was the problem.America’s external vulnerabilities are therefore closely linked to its fiscal fragility. Cutting government borrowing would kill two birds with one stone. Mr Chinn estimates that a reduction of a percentage point in the budget deficit would cut the current-account deficit by about half a percentage point. For his part, Mr Obstfeld is blunt about the alternative to a fiscal rebalancing: “If the government keeps borrowing the way it is, it is quite unlikely that we will ever achieve a trade surplus.”Several potential paths to smaller budget deficits would have the additional benefit of encouraging consumers to save. For instance, if the government reformed health-insurance and pension programmes to make them less generous as the population ages, it would be rational for households to save more themselves. The government could also implement a well-designed consumption tax at the national level (the complete absence of such a levy makes America unusual). Unfortunately, the political reality is that no fiscal consolidation is in the offing. Mr Trump’s tax bill, which is making its way through Congress, will prolong enormous deficits.In this respect, Mr Trump is hardly unique: successive administrations have presided over wider budget deficits, endangering the country’s fiscal health and accumulating external liabilities that threaten to amplify financial turmoil. The Trump administration does stand out, however, for its simultaneous insistence it is rebalancing the world economy. Its fiscal stance is more suitable for a crisis economy sucking in emergency imports than one attempting a move away from consumption. A simultaneous hatred of trade deficits and embrace of government borrowing is utterly contradictory—perfectly normal, in other words, for Trumponomics. ■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in economics, finance and markets, sign up to Money Talks, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.