Finance & economics - Stanley Fischer mixed rigour and realism, compassion and calm

The former IMF, Bank of Israel and Federal Reserve official died on May 31st. He looked ridiculous, his wife assured him. Stan Fischer, the number-two official at the IMF, was supposed to be enjoying a holiday on Martha’s Vineyard in July 1998. Instead, he was perched on a sand dune, mobile-phone at his ear, trying to negotiate a bail-out of Russia, a country deemed “too nuclear to fail”.Russia’s crisis also ruined Mr Fischer’s next holiday on the Greek island of Mykonos. He had to fly back to Washington, records “The Chastening”, a book by Paul Blustein, huddled under a blanket so other passengers could not overhear his phone calls.Mr Fischer, who died on May 31st aged 81, bore such indignities with stoical good humour. This composure, as well as his wisdom, endeared him to his peers, his staff and even the many emerging-market officials, “fear in their eyes”, who turned to the fund for help during his tenure from 1994 to 2001. They hailed from Mexico, Thailand, Indonesia, South Korea, Brazil and Argentina, as well as Russia. The Thai central bank, which had hidden the parlous state of its foreign-exchange reserves, eventually offered to reveal the true number. But only to Mr Fischer. One head of Brazil’s central bank refused to deal with IMF staffers, whose command of economics failed to impress him. But he spoke every day to Mr Fischer, whose credentials could not be doubted.The IMF man had travelled a long way to earn those credentials. Mr Fischer grew up in Mazabuka, a small town in what is now Zambia, where his father, a Jewish immigrant from Latvia, ran the general store. He won a scholarship to the London School of Economics, where he was beguiled by the technocratic promise of his new discipline: “all it would take is a bit of algebra” to solve the problems of policymaking. He earned his PhD at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where he returned as a faculty member after a few years away at the University of Chicago.Although he had been charmed by Keynes’s “General Theory”, he saw the assault on Keynesian economics from Chicago and elsewhere as an opportunity not just a threat. He adopted the critics’ internally consistent, forward-looking models, added a dash of realism, and reached different conclusions. The critics claimed that monetary policymakers are powerless to steer output if everyone knows what they are up to. But this policy fatalism ceases to be true if wages are somewhat “sticky” or inflexible, as Mr Fischer showed in a breakthrough paper published in 1977.With its simplicity and punch, the paper was in keeping with a vibrant tradition of MIT economics. Indeed, Mr Fischer became what economists might call a “transmission mechanism” for that tradition, co-writing two textbooks, teaching a legendary class and advising the theses of some of the world’s most influential economists, including Mario Draghi, former head of the European Central Bank, and Ben Bernanke, former chair of America’s Federal Reserve, where Mr Fischer himself would serve as vice-chair from 2014-17. According to Olivier Blanchard, another protégé and co-author, some of this advising would take place while jogging along the Charles river. When Mr Fischer wanted his student to slow down their presentation, he would speed up his jogging.Mr Fischer’s first foray into policymaking was seductively successful. In the 1980s he provided advice on quashing triple-digit inflation to Israel, a country close to his heart (and where he would later serve as central-bank governor). Israel cut its budget deficit, pegged its currency temporarily and raised interest rates, combined with a less orthodox wage freeze. The plan worked. Mr Fischer’s main regret was the neglect of structural reforms, such as privatising government firms, which were not essential to the rescue plan, but proved difficult to implement after it succeeded.Crises he faced at the IMF defied similar treatment. Neither Mexico nor Thailand, which had borrowed heavily in dollars, could exit their currency peg as painlessly as Israel. Budget-tightening prescribed in Thailand and South Korea was counterproductive. Indonesia’s plan included too many structural reforms.In some debates within the IMF, Mr Fischer had a dovish reputation. He gave his blessing to fiscal easing in Thailand and South Korea when it quickly became clear austerity was unnecessary. He understood that investors’ expectations could be self-fulfilling. Like Peter Pan, the fund often found itself trying to persuade investors to believe in rescues that could have worked if investors had only believed they would. Their failure was not in itself proof they were wrong to try. He was less worried than many of the fund’s critics about moral hazard—the argument that saving people from the consequences of their misdeeds makes future mistakes more likely. In Mr Fischer’s view, if you have to cripple a country to send a message, the message is being sent too late.But he was no softie. He recognised that macroeconomics often requires choosing between bad options. “Whatever type of exchange-rate arrangement a country has, there will be times when it wished it had a different one,” he once said. He compiled a list of lessons from the crises he faced at the IMF, the Bank of Israel and the Fed. One was the value of what he called the “eternal verities” preached by the IMF, including the need to keep inflation and the public debt in check and to follow growth-friendly policies.In 1995 he paid a visit to his father’s hometown in Latvia where he saw the damage wreaked by communism, an experiment that lasted two generations and set the country back a generation, according to his calculations. A trip back to Zambia in 2000 was more encouraging. He was welcomed by the new owner of his father’s shop and saw considerable progress. It is, he reflected, “a long way from Mazabuka to the IMF”. He had crossed that vast interval. And like the hurricane lamps that once illuminated his home, he was an unstinting light even in the worst storms. ■Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.