Business - Germany thinks about cancelling a public holiday

There are plenty to chose from. “Ja, ja, ja, now we’re gonna spit on our hands, we will increase the gross national product!” is the refrain from Geier Sturzflug’s biggest hit. The band’s “Gross National Product” topped Germany’s pop charts in 1983, when the country’s work ethic was still ferocious: “when grandpa gets on his bike on Sunday/and sneaks into the factory/then grandma worries he’ll collapse/because grandpa is working an extra shift again today.”German workers now move to a more languorous beat. They laboured for the shortest time over a year of any wealthy economy in 2023, according to the oecd, clocking up an average of 1,343 hours, compared with Americans who slogged away for 1,705 hours and—perhaps more surprisingly— Greeks, who toiled for 1,897 hours. If Germany is to pay for much needed investments in defence and infrastructure, this needs to change, reckons Clemens Fuest, head of the Ifo Institute, a think-tank in Munich. He has suggested cancelling of one of the country’s many public holidays, a sacrifice which he claims would boost GDP by about €8bn ($9bn) annually.Germans can probably afford to lose one day of rest. They will enjoy nine nationwide public holidays this year, a middling number compared with the rest of Europe. But the country’s 16 states add many more of varying justification, such as Thuringia’s Weltkindertag (World Children’s Day) and Saxony’s “Day of Prayer and Remembrance”. Bavaria leads with 13, followed by Baden Württemberg with 12, and Saxony and Thuringia with 11 each.The spacing of some public holidays makes a day in the office almost a novelty at times. Berlin had three in May this year: Labour Day, the “anniversary of the liberation from national socialism and the end of the second world war” and Ascension Day. All were on a Thursday, so many Berliners took Friday off for good measure. Another long weekend is in the pipeline for Whit Monday (June 9th). And many across the country are out of sync, says Mr Fuest, which can, for example, prevent lorries making deliveries in neighbouring states that are taking a break.Business leaders back the idea of losing a public holiday (some even call for cancelling two), but unions are, unsurprisingly, staunchly opposed. German politicians should look to Denmark. In 2023 its government decided to abolish “Great Prayer Day”, a religious holiday on the fourth Friday after Easter, to help pay for higher defence spending. Tens of thousands took to the streets in protest, but Mette Frederiksen, the Danish prime minister, was not deterred. Last year the holiday was cancelled. Germany’s government will need similar resolve to get workers to spit on their hands and boost GNP. ■