Culture - Would you pay $100,000 for an orchid?

When orchidomania swept Europe in the 19th century, people forked out for flowers. In 1818 an orchid was sent from Brazil to Britain. The specimen, later christened Cattleya labiata, had been collected by William Swainson, an English naturalist keen to make a name for himself in an age when natural history was newly fashionable. When eventually induced to bloom, revealing crimson, lip-shaped petals, C. labiata was agreed to be among the most splendid of its kind. It “must strike with admiration every beholder who is not actually insensible of the charms of nature”, one keen fan wrote.Unfortunately, and unhelpfully, Swainson had emigrated to New Zealand without stating exactly where his specimen had come from. Other members of the genus Cattleya were subsequently described, but no further examples of C. labiata turned up. By the 1880s, to anthophiles’ disappointment, it was widely doubted that it still existed. Then, ahead of the World Fair in Paris in 1889, a painting was found, suggesting there were more. A frenzied new era of “Orchidomania” sprang up.Sarah Bilston, a British academic, came across this phenomenon while researching an earlier book. Victorians had become obsessed by the idea of possessing the plants partly out of scientific interest and partly as a chance to show off in a newly rich society. Exotic orchids could fetch what a clerk earned in a month, so the flowers were status symbols akin to a Birkin bag or sports car today. The fervour reached the very top of society: even Queen Victoria was a fan of the blooms.By 1889 prices for the rarest specimens had risen roughly a hundred-fold since Swainson’s time, sometimes fetching the equivalent of $100,000 in today’s money. An intense competition to rediscover C. labiata’s natural habitat was soon under way, involving men from several European countries. They risked injury and illness to get their hands on it. (They often turned to local expertise and labour for support on their expeditions.) “The Lost Orchid” offers an entertaining account of the rivalry between the plant hunters.Dr Bilston weaves from these facts a story of social change, laissez-faire capitalism and the interaction of science and commerce. Readers will detect all the contradictions of the 19th century in the story of C. labiata. On the one hand, it was a time of unprecedented progress. Scientific discoveries were feted, trade and industry boomed and people grew richer, healthier and more literate. In Britain the orchid became a symbol of such developments. It “was a tangible signal of...Britain’s global reach and growing technical and economic power”, the author writes.At the same time, Dr Bilston points out, the orchid embodied fears about “the dangers of consumerism and capitalism”. Forests across the world were ransacked for orchids. In Malaya, one local complained in 1850, “Jungles are nearly stripped of all the Orchidaceous plants, such has been the demand for them of late.”As Brazil was logged for timber or charcoal, the very places where orchids such as C. labiata grew were decimated. Land was given over to plantations, as coffee beans proved more valuable than blooms. Dr Bilston observes that “A tone of dismayed grief about the engines of modern life is a common feature of the Victorian fin de siècle in Britain and Europe.” As people became more conscious of humans’ impact on the environment, the seeds of a conservation movement were sown.Thus Dr Bilston uses the orchid to unfurl a greater story about progress and the planet. At times this tips into needless hand-wringing about the diversity of her sources and the use of vague terms such as “practices of erasure”—which proves that all history is a reflection of the time in which it is written. Still, horticulturists and economists alike will enjoy her colourful tale of C. labiata and its multifarious meanings. “It was an alluring spectacle and an object of science, a delight for a broadening swathe of the public and a meeting ground of the serious...a market commodity and a glimpse of the divine hand of God.” Talk about flower power. ■For more on the latest books, films, TV shows, albums and controversies, sign up to Plot Twist, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter