Obituary - Amanda Feilding fought to rescue the reputation of psychedelics

The campaigner and scientific collaborator died on May 22nd, aged 82. The feeling was not at all what she had expected. It was very subtle. A lightening and a lifting, as when you put breath into a balloon. A feeling of return, like the tide coming in.The tide she actually saw was much more scary. Big splashes of blood on her white tunic, and a river down her face. Well, you couldn’t expect much else when you trepanned yourself. She had done it with a pedal-operated dentist’s drill, right in the middle of her forehead. Quite neatly, in fact, with a hole in her skull of only half a centimetre. Her surgery was so clever that, after mopping herself up, she was ready to party, in a flowing Moroccan robe and with a gold turban hiding the wound.The reason she had done it, up in her attic in December 1970, was to let lightness in. Her lover, Bart Huges, a young Dutch scientist, believed that much mental illness stemmed from sluggish blood-flow to the brain. The full heartbeat had to express itself within the cranial cavity, loosening the grip of the tyrant ego. She had dreamed as a child of watering the desert; now trepanation, an ancient procedure to let bad spirits out, might revitalise the desert of her brain. No modern doctor would perform it, so it was do-it-yourself time. Amanda’s pet pigeon, Birdie, had made sure to fly out of the window before she began.She had tried several other things. In the 1960s and 70s, almost everyone did. At 16 she smoked cannabis; it made her hear the world in a new way. In her early 20s she sampled LSD. Her first trip was like a heavenly funfair; her second, a disaster. Someone had spiked her coffee with hundreds of trips-worth of the stuff, and she took months to recover. The psychic wound was never quite cured, she felt. But her scientific curiosity was undaunted.Hers had been an odd childhood. The family were upper-class bohemian farmers, cash-poor but sitting on many acres in a three-towered Tudor hunting lodge. They were isolated and barely socialised. Her most vivid experiences took place outdoors, in the large garden, full of winding paths, where she imagined a god lived; and in the fields where from the age of three she followed her diabetic father, with glucose in her pocket to save him during his hypoglycemic fits. This dosing of the blood fascinated her. She won the science prize at school, but dropped out to study mysticism instead. The two subjects seemed to go together, and later fused in a single campaign: to find out with the best science how psychedelics worked, and thereby to show how their consciousness-expanding effects might safely benefit human beings.This was a hard path to tread. After the mind-bending hippie years, psychedelics were taboo. In government wars against drugs the potentially useful, non-addictive ones—LSD, cannabis, psilocybin (magic mushrooms) DMT, MDMA (ecstasy) and ayahuasca—were criminalised along with heroin and cocaine. Doctors would not touch them; scientists ignored them. Yet in other civilisations these were sacraments, not the devil’s work. Of course taking them willy-nilly was highly dangerous; she knew all about that. Yet if they could help relieve the physical and mental ills of the modern world, they were worth researching.How could she get that message across? Her first thought was to go into politics. She had a certain fame in the press as the drug-crazed woman with a hole in her head, so she ran twice as an independent for her Chelsea constituency, in flowing robes and turban and with Birdie on her shoulder, offering trepanning on the NHS. (On her second run in 1983 her vote doubled, to 139.) But she knew that science was the way forward, not sensation.The real problem was that she had no letters after her name. It was an uphill push to campaign from her kitchen table; she would have to work her way into the scientific establishment with some sort of Trojan horse. So she set up a foundation. She did that in 1996, eventually calling it the Beckley Foundation (BF) after her family home. Conveniently, it had an Oxford postcode; her marriage the year before to the Earl of Wemyss gave her extra social heft; and persistence did the rest, drawing to her cause the professors of neuroscience at both Oxford and Cambridge and David Nutt, Britain’s former, interestingly maverick drug tsar. Her particular prize was Albert Hofmann, the Swiss chemist who had synthesised LSD, felt it had been a gift for the world, and tirelessly preached the importance of studying psychedelics properly.Her foundation’s HQ was a five-person office in a converted cowshed at Beckley, but it soon found impressive venues elsewhere. From 1998 she hosted 11 international seminars on drug policy for government ministers and intellectuals in the House of Lords: a nice high seat to shoot from. BF also collaborated with some of the best labs in the world. With Johns Hopkins, in 2006, it produced the first scientific evidence that psilocybin might be useful in treating nicotine addiction; ten years later, a collaboration with Imperial College confirmed it seemed to help in treatment-resistant depression. She was especially keen to see the physiological effects of altered states of consciousness, so BF helped generate the first images, flaming orange, of the brain on LSD. Microdosing with acid, as she had done for years, also seemed to make dying patients happy.This was hardly a revolution. But it shifted medical thinking. Once doctors were confronted with evidence-based research (as well as her 80 co-written articles in peer-reviewed journals), their minds opened a little. In fact, you could say, their consciousness expanded. She was careful not to push them too far. But as she took reporters round her magic garden, among the tall topiaries and the ponds she had dug in accordance with sacred geometry, she would let slip further mystical thoughts: that the brain might be a receptor for a wider form of consciousness; that consciousness might in fact be everywhere. And that you did not necessarily need a hole in the head to let the light in. ■