Science & technology - A leaderless NASA faces its biggest-ever cuts

More than 40 science missions would be cancelled if Donald Trump’s budget goes through. NASA knew it was in for a grim year. In early May the White House published a preliminary budget that proposed drastic cuts in the agency’s funding, from $24.8bn to $18.8bn. That would bring it to its lowest level, when adjusted for inflation, in several decades, with the agency’s scientific work taking the brunt. On May 30th the agency was given the full details, as a newer version of the budget spelled out exactly where the axe would fall.Nor was that the end of the bad news. The next day Donald Trump, America’s president, announced he was withdrawing his nomination of Jared Isaacman, a well-regarded businessman and private astronaut, as NASA’s boss. For at least the next several months, the agency will have to contemplate its straitened future without a permanent leader.The White House’s budget proposes a modest rise in spending on human space flight, and doubles down on the agency’s so-far successful experiment in handing off much of that work to the private sector. NASA’s scientific work, by contrast, would be gutted, with its budget cut almost in half, to $3.9bn a year. Around 5,500 people, out of a workforce of 17,400-odd, would lose their jobs. Dozens of missions—both planned and already operating—would be abandoned. It would, says Casey Dreier, chief of space policy at the Planetary Society, be an “extinction-level event” for NASA’s scientific work.The budget slays several sacred cows in the area of human space flight. It proposes abandoning the Space Launch System (SLS), a giant rocket intended to take astronauts back to the Moon. Built from 1970s technology and with an estimated cost of more than $2bn per launch, the SLS is as much a congressionally mandated jobs programme as it is a rocket. Many at NASA will be privately relieved to see it go. The budget likewise withdraws funding for the Lunar Gateway, a space station intended to orbit the Moon. Many observers, including at least one former NASA administrator, regard the Gateway as a boondoggle that further complicates future missions.The hope is that private companies such as SpaceX and Blue Origin, which already have contracts to build landers for NASA’s Moon missions, can do a better job. That may be a risky bet: SpaceX’s giant Starship rocket, the most obvious replacement, has struggled in recent test launches. Nevertheless, the budget includes $864m to encourage a commercial replacement for SLS and Orion (the vehicle that will carry astronauts to the Moon). There is also $200m for private companies to show they can transport cargo to Mars—as they are already starting to do to the Moon.The enormous cuts to scientific research seem to have little internal logic. Perhaps unsurprisingly, given Republican hostility to the subject, NASA’s Earth Sciences division, which includes its work on climate change, faces a 52% reduction in funding. But less political areas of research are slashed, too. The planetary-science budget (which covers the other planets) would fall by nearly 32%. Money for heliophysics (the study of the Sun) would drop by 46%. Astrophysics faces a 66% chop.Cuts that big cannot be made by salami-slicing. Instead 41 different scientific missions, both upcoming and already under way, would be abandoned. One casualty is the Mars Sample Return mission, which aims to return Martian rocks to Earth where they can be studied in much greater detail than any robotic rover can manage. Late and over budget, it may have been cancelled under any president. But other missions suffer, too. The DaVinci and Veritas probes, due to launch in the early 2030s, would be the first American missions to Venus since 1989. Both are on the chopping block. The Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope—chosen in 2010 as NASA’s highest astronomical priority—will get less than half its previous budget.Ongoing missions face the axe as well. The budget would cancel the OSIRIS spacecraft’s examination of Apophis, a large asteroid which will narrowly avoid colliding with Earth in 2029. It would end the missions of Juno, a probe which arrived at Jupiter in 2016, and New Horizons, which flew past Pluto the year before and which has explored the far reaches of the solar system ever since.Seeing all these changes through would tax even the best administrator. But for the next few months at least, NASA will have no administrator at all. The White House gave no reason for ditching Mr Isaacman, who had enjoyed support among both Republicans and Democrats, beyond vague allusions to his “prior associations”. (One common speculation is that his nomination was pulled as a way to damage Elon Musk, who is thought to have championed Mr Isaacman’s appointment, and whose influence in the White House has waned.) No replacement has been announced.The biggest question is the response of America’s Congress—which must approve the White House’s budget before it can become law. Prioritising crewed missions over science is more or less the opposite of what the Pew Research Centre, a polling organisation, found the American public wanted in 2023 (see chart). Democrats, and even some Republicans, have said they will fight the science cuts—though Congress has so far shown little willingness to take on Mr Trump. In any case, says Mr Dreier, even if lawmakers manage to reverse half of the cuts, they would remain the biggest the agency has faced in decades. ■Curious about the world? To enjoy our mind-expanding science coverage, sign up to Simply Science, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.