The world this week - Business

America and China reached a tentative agreement on trade following talks in London that were attended by senior members of both governments. America’s main sticking-point was greater access to China’s rare earths, which the White House said had been resolved. Under the framework America will still charge a 55% tariff on Chinese goods, made up of a 10% reciprocal levy, 20% tariff related to fentanyl smuggling and 25% in existing duties. Donald Trump described it as a done deal, which would include Chinese students “using our colleges and universities”.Constrained by Mr Trump’s trade war, China’s exports to America plunged by 35% in May, year on year. Many businesses brought forward their orders for Chinese goods earlier in the year to beat the imposition of tariffs. Still, China’s exports in total increased by 5% in May, and were up by 12% to the European Union.Despite Washington’s newfound bonhomie with China over trade, the United States embassy in Panama announced that the American government would replace telecoms towers in the country that have been made by Huawei, a Chinese company, with “secure American technology”. This would help “counter the malign influence of China throughout our hemisphere”, it said.The World Bank cut its estimate of global growth this year because of “trade-related headwinds”. The world economy is now expected to expand by 2.3%, down from the bank’s January forecast of 2.7%. America’s GDP is now expected to grow by 1.4%, down from 2.3% in January. The bank said that “Without a swift course correction, the harm to living standards could be deep”.Central banks worldwide now hold almost as much gold as they did in 1965, according to the European Central Bank, which found that bullion had replaced the euro in 2024 as the second-biggest store of official reserves, after the dollar. Gold prices have rocketed from $2,320 a troy ounce a year ago to around $3,350.In France the Senate voted for a bill to ban advertising for fast-fashion companies such as Shein and Temu amid concerns that their cheap almost-disposable clothing is not environmentally sustainable. The bill has a whiff of protectionism about it by making a distinction between “ultra” fast fashion, such as that sold by the two Chinese companies, and “classic” fast fashion supplied by European retailers, such as Zara and H&M.Following Mr Trump’s imposition of tariffs on cars made in Mexico, General Motors announced plans to invest $4bn in its factories in the United States, bringing home the production of some vehicles that currently takes place across the border.America’s annual rate of inflation rose slightly in May, to 2.4%. There is little evidence so far that the higher costs of imported goods, because of tariffs, are being passed on to consumers, though economists expect that to change in the coming months.The British government confirmed that it would invest a further £11.5bn ($15.5bn) in the Sizewell C nuclear plant on top of the £2.7bn it put in last year. The plant is expected to start supplying energy to homes in the mid-2030s, but the funding commitment is only for the current parliament, or around three to four years.Warner Bros Discovery decided to split into two separate companies, one focused on its film studio, HBO and streaming assets and the other on its television channels, which include CNN. The split frees the fast-growing streaming side of the business from the waning cable-TV side.Apple’s annual Worldwide Developers Conference was an unusually subdued affair. The main announcements were an upgrade to Apple’s operating system and a decision to let app developers access its artificial intelligence, but there were no big developments in AI. Apple is reportedly struggling to create the large language models it needs and investors are worried that it is falling behind in the AI race. Its share price has fallen by more than 20% this year, an even worse performance than Tesla’s.Tesla’s stock clawed most of its losses, after falling by 14% when Mr Trump threatened to end government contracts with Elon Musk’s companies following the spectacular break-up of their relationship. Mr Musk has left the government and criticised Mr Trump’s “big, beautiful” spending bill. “I regret some of my posts” about the president, he said, without elaborating if that meant his claim (for which he produced no evidence) that Mr Trump is mentioned in secret files on Jeffrey Epstein, a deceased sex offender. Mr Trump said he had “no hard feelings” and opened the door to a reconciliation.