By Invitation - Britain’s ex-chancellor on how to fix a welfare crisis that’s partly of his own making

Reforming benefits for the mentally ill is the only way to avoid growth-killing tax increases, argues Jeremy Hunt. THIS WEEK Rachel Reeves, Britain’s chancellor of the exchequer, announced the outcome of the government’s spending review. She sugared the pill of real-terms budget cuts for most government departments from next year with growth-friendly capital projects for regions outside London. But underneath her decisions lies a dilemma which I too was forced to confront as chancellor: are growth-destroying tax increases the only way Britain can afford decent public services? Many respected economists think we are now condemned to a doom-loop of ever higher taxes and ever lower growth.They are wrong. But we should start by acknowledging why Britain’s public finances are so tight. It is not the fictitious £22bn ($28bn) “black hole”, a political device engineered by the current Labour government to justify tax rises. Rather it is a steadily building pressure that all recent chancellors have faced from an ageing population and the need to spend more on defence. If the British economy were growing like the clappers, we might just about be able to manage. With anaemic growth we can’t.So Ms Reeves is right to prioritise getting back to the 2%-plus growth we had before the global financial crisis of 2007-09. That, however, will take time. Measures that boost business investment, reduce energy costs and speed up planning decisions are all necessary. Some, on planning and pensions reform, are under way. Other government actions, such as the rise in employers’ national insurance, a payroll tax, have taken us in the wrong direction.Even if we implemented the most beneficial measures, however, they would not deal with the immediate pressures. And one of those pressures will be felt acutely at this month’s NATO summit. At the same summit in 2018 I was sitting at the table when Donald Trump threatened to pull America out of the alliance unless Europe spent more on defence. This time Europe—including Britain—will need to cough up.To avoid more tax rises this autumn, there is only one game in town: welfare reform. Recent noises from the government have not been encouraging. They include a U-turn on winter-fuel payments for pensioners. But proper reform would be transformative fiscally and also for the supply side of the economy. It could also make a big dent in poverty, including among children.Since the pandemic Britain has been dishing out disability and incapacity benefits to a million more claimants. The cost of disability benefits has gone up by 45% in real terms. No other European or G7 country has seen anything similar—indeed, in Germany the number of claimants has fallen. The Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS), a British think-tank, describes it as “largely a UK phenomenon”.Even after recently announced savings, the costs are still rising. If the chancellor cut the value of overall working-age benefit claims to 2019 levels, she would save £49bn a year in real terms by the end of the fiscal period. That is more than enough to avoid tax rises as we wait for longer-term growth measures to kick in.So why is Britain such an outlier on welfare spending? I am afraid I may be indirectly responsible. In 2014, as health secretary, I passed the Care Act through Parliament. It included a landmark reform requiring the secretary of state to try to treat mental and physical health equally in order to stop the National Health Service from treating mental health as a poor relation. The NHS now treats 2m more mental-health patients every year.But the act had unintended consequences. The IFS says that mental-illness claims account for more than half of the postpandemic increase in disability benefits. Citing anxiety or depression on a benefit claim boosts entitlement to Universal Credit and the Personal Independence Payment, the two main benefits. But is it the right way to give people the help they need? Doctors say that social contact is one of the most important ways to tackle mental illness. Signing people off work does the opposite. Of course we should support people who are unable to work because of the most severe mental illnesses. However, signing off those with moderate anxiety or depression could make their problems worse.We therefore need a total overhaul of the way the benefits system treats people with mental illness. The Care Act does not apply to the Department for Work and Pensions, the ministry responsible for welfare, so there is no law that needs changing. Instead of signing people with mental illness off work, we should direct them to treatment. For just £1bn a year we could double the number of people using the highly successful NHS “talking therapies”, such as counselling and cognitive behavioural therapy.Getting more people into work is also a powerful supply-side measure to boost GDP and living standards without resorting to more migration. Around half of people with disabilities are in work in Britain. In Denmark it is three-quarters. One of the reasons Denmark has higher living standards is that nearly 80% of its adult population work, several percentage points more than in Britain. Part of that is because of generous work incentives that cost money, such as the child-care measures I copied in my budget. But if the impact is more people in work, such spending more than pays for itself.Welfare reform is not easy. But nor is it beyond the ability of a government with a large majority and plenty of time left in the parliamentary calendar. When you include pensions, Britain now spends 11% of its GDP on welfare, nearly five times more than it spends on defence. Reforming it may now be the only card the government has left. ■Jeremy Hunt was Britain’s chancellor of the exchequer from 2022 to 2024. He is the author of “Can We Be Great Again? Why a Dangerous World Needs Britain” (2025).