The world this week - Politics

Violent protests were triggered in Los Angeles by an attempt to arrest illegal migrants. Donald Trump’s decision to deploy the National Guard to the city, backed by US marines, to support immigration agents was condemned as a provocation by Democrats; Gavin Newsom, California’s governor, described the uninvited deployment as an abuse of presidential power. Karen Bass, the city’s mayor, eventually imposed a curfew in the protests’ hot spots. The Republican governor of Texas, Greg Abbott, had no hesitation in putting the National Guard on standby there, as demonstrations spread to the state.A Salvadorean migrant who was mistakenly deported by America to El Salvador was returned to the United States. American courts had told the Trump administration to facilitate the return of Kilmar Abrego Garcia. After months of foot-dragging, it eventually relented, and sent him straight to a courtroom in Nashville on charges of transporting illegal migrants within the US. America’s health secretary, Robert F. Kennedy junior, dismissed all 17 members of an expert panel that advises the government on vaccines. Mr Kennedy, who accused the advisory committee of a lack of transparency over conflicts of interest, appointed eight new members.Australia, Britain, Canada, New Zealand and Norway placed sanctions on two far-right government ministers in Israel, Itamar Ben-Gvir and Bezalel Smotrich, for their alleged “repeated incitements of violence against Palestinian communities”. In Gaza the Hamas-run health ministry said that more Palestinians had been killed near aid centres run by the American-backed Gaza Humanitarian Foundation. Israel has accused militants of trying to disrupt the distribution of supplies, which remain far short of what is needed to feed the population. Five workers from the GHF were shot dead, which the foundation blamed on Hamas. Adding to the carnage, Israel confirmed that it had armed a criminal gang in Gaza in the hope it will fight Hamas. The gang is thought to have stolen aid in the past.Israeli naval forces boarded a ship being used by activists, including Greta Thunberg, to bring aid to Gaza. Israel said the ship was a stunt, describing it as a “selfie yacht” with little actual aid on board. Ms Thunberg was deported.Wagner, a mercenary group backed by Russia, said it was leaving Mali. The group claimed it had accomplished its mission of helping the junta wrest back control from jihadists. Yet there is little evidence that the threat from jihadism, which is spilling from the Sahel into neighbouring countries, has diminished.At least 20 people were killed in attacks in north-central Nigeria. It was the latest flare-up of violence in the region, where clashes between nomadic herders and settled farmers are common. A Kenyan blogger who died in police custody in Nairobi was beaten to death, according to an autopsy report. The police had initially claimed that Albert Ojwang died of self-inflicted injuries. His death sparked protests in Kenya.An Air India flight destined for London’s Gatwick airport crashed soon after taking off from Ahmedabad. More than 240 people were on board.The government in Pakistan announced a new budget, which cuts overall spending by 7% to help comply with an IMF loan agreement. But following the recent military clash with India, defence spending was increased by about 20%.Sara Duterte, the vice-president of the Philippines, was thrown a lifeline in her impeachment trial in Congress when the Senate decided to return the case to the House to reconsider its constitutionality. Ms Duterte, who may run for president in 2028, hopes to count on the support of a newly elected Congress when it convenes in late July.The high court in Seoul decided to indefinitely postpone a trial of South Korea’s new president, Lee Jae-myung, for alleged breaches of election law in 2022. The announcement allows Mr Lee to begin his term without the distraction of a potentially embarrassing court case. In Colombia Miguel Uribe Turbay, a conservative senator and presidential candidate, was in a critical condition after being shot in the head at a campaign rally. A 15-year-old suspect was arrested. Marco Rubio, America’s secretary of state, said the shooting was engendered by “violent leftist rhetoric” from the government. Meanwhile, at least eight people were killed in bomb-and-gun attacks centred on the city of Cali and nearby towns.Jair Bolsonaro, Brazil’s president from 2019 to 2023, gave testimony at his trial in the Supreme Court for allegedly trying to stop Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva from taking power after he won the 2022 election. Mr Bolsonaro denied plotting to overthrow the government, but admitted he had sought “alternatives” to stay in office. He also apologised to the court’s judges, who hold his fate in their hands, for making untrue claims of corruption against them. The International Organisation for Migration, a UN body, reported that 1.3m people are now internally displaced in Haiti, up by 24% since December. Port-au-Prince remains the centre of the country’s unrest, but gang violence is spreading beyond the capital, it said. Rachel Reeves, Britain’s chancellor of the exchequer, unveiled a review of public spending. New money was allocated to health and defence, but other departments, such as the Home Office, which oversees policing and immigration, were kept short of cash. Ms Reeves also announced a huge new programme for affordable housing by reallocating capital spending.Earlier, Britain’s Labour government made a U-turn on its deeply unpopular policy of means-testing the winter-fuel allowance for the elderly. All state pensioners will now receive the allowance, but any individual with an income over £35,000 ($47,250) will have the payment (or a portion of it) recovered through the tax system. People can opt out, to avoid having to deal with allowance repayments.Russia continued its bombardment of Ukraine, conducting intense air strikes and launching one of its biggest drone attacks on Kyiv since the war began. Meanwhile, NATO’s secretary-general, Mark Rutte, called for a 400% rise in spending on air defences. A summit of the alliance starting on June 24th is expected to call on member states formally to increase defence spending, broadly defined, to 5% of GDP. Predicting that Russia could strike NATO within five years, Mr Rutte believes that “We’re all on the eastern flank now.”The European Union announced a new package of sanctions targeting Russia, its 18th since the start of the war in February 2022. The new penalties ban any “EU operator” from transacting with the Nord Stream gas pipelines and lowers the cap on prices for Russian oil from $60 to $45 a barrel. The EU also targeted another 77 vessels on top of the 342 already listed that it says are part of the Russian shadow fleet that exports oil.In Poland the centrist Civic Coalition easily won a vote of confidence in parliament, where it holds a majority. The vote had been called by Donald Tusk, the prime minister, to shore up his government following the victory of Karol Nawrocki, a conservative-nationalist, in the recent presidential election.Ten people were shot dead and 11 injured by a gunman at a school in Graz, Austria’s second-most-populous city. The shooter, a 21-year-old former pupil at the school, killed himself.A referendum in Italy that would, among other things, have lowered residency requirements for migrants to apply for citizenship was declared invalid because not enough people voted. Turnout was 30%, well below the 50% threshold for referendums. Giorgia Meloni, the right-wing prime minister, had described the plebiscite as unnecessary, because Italy’s immigration laws were already “very open”.