Letters - America’s tax on foreign investors

Also this week, fact-checking, “Bluey”, public speaking, nose hair. Letters are welcome via e-mail to letters@economist.comFind out more about how we process your letterYour leader on Section 899 in the Republican budget bill obscured the true reasoning behind the provision and its inclusion in the legislation (“Capital pains”, June 7th). Rather than being merely a tax on foreign investors, Section 899 is a measured response to the OECD’s “two pillar” plan, which creates discriminatory taxes on successful American firms (pillar one) and an extra-territorial global minimum tax that conflicts with America’s tax code and international tax treaties. As the co-author of Section 899, I, along with my Republican colleagues, have forcefully and repeatedly opposed the OECD’s plan for more than three years. As you mentioned, the provision is written narrowly to apply to digital services taxes, as well as other discriminatory taxes levied on business such as the undertaxed profits rule. The nonpartisan Joint Committee on Taxation, made up of House and Senate members, estimated that, under one scenario, the US Treasury would lose $122bn over ten years if the rest of the world implemented pillar two. Section 899 would raise $116bn over the same time period, effectively defending our tax base in a corresponding manner.The authority to write tax law is still jealously guarded by Congress, unlike other countries that seem to have ceded some of their taxation policy to Brussels. This targeted provision in the budget bill will apply only to countries that want to pilfer our Treasury. The message is simple. Remove the offending taxes or suffer the consequences.Congressman Ron EstesHouse Ways and Means CommitteeUnited States CongressWashington, DC“The lie-detectors” (May 17th) discussed the work of “doughty fact-checking organisations” and mentioned that Facebook and Instagram “deleted 27m falsehoods about covid-19” during the pandemic. Among the “falsehoods” that these platforms deleted were posts claiming that covid-19 came from a laboratory, posts objecting to mask mandates and posts arguing that social distancing was ineffective. At the very least, these statements are now open to debate.Fact-checking during the pandemic should provide a cautionary tale about censorship, rather than a model for future fact-checkers, doughty or otherwise, to follow.Judge GlockDirector of researchManhattan Institute Fairfax, VirginiaYour review of “Fatherhood: A History of Love and Power” by Augustine Sedgewick, mentioned that today’s trend in television is to portray “dads as doofuses”, Peter Griffin in “Family Guy” being a prime example (“The sins of the fathers”, May 17th). As the father of a wonderfully wilful two-and-a-half-year-old can I recommend “Bluey” instead to my fellow fathers. The cartoon series is about a family of Australian cattle dogs. Named after the family’s eldest daughter, the show is largely centred on the relationship that she and Bingo, her sister, have with their father, Bandit. His patience, forbearance and wholehearted playfulness are actively educational and inspiring to this dad. And running at just seven minutes apiece, an episode doesn’t interrupt playtime for too long.Henry BiggsMinchinhampton, GloucestershireBartleby is right in recognising that speaking in public is a widely shared fear (May 24th). The most important thing to realise is that nobody overcomes this fear without practice, and with practice, anyone can. Trust me on this. The academic profession selectively recruits introverts and then expects them to deliver lectures to hundreds of sceptical teenagers. When we begin our careers few academics relish this opportunity, but with practice it becomes part of a normal day. Sometimes we even enjoy it. If we can learn to do it, anyone can.Tom StaffordProfessor of cognitive scienceUniversity of SheffieldA quiet institution devoted to public speaking has been developing in London and Essex for the past 19 years. The Jack Petchey Speak Out Challenge runs workshops in schools teaching essential speaking techniques like those that Bartleby experienced at RADA. Each student makes a speech on a topic important to them, and has the chance to compete in various stages culminating in a grand final held at the Cambridge Theatre in London.I was the runner-up in my borough’s regional final in 2024, when I was 15, and this March had the immense pleasure of judging the event. I have been struck by the diversity of subjects that participants choose, from their experiences with knife crime and racism to their love of pigeons and universal basic income, as well as their confidence when delivering their speeches thanks to expert training.The competition is especially useful, given that every pupil must complete a spoken-language examination as part of their GCSE English Language qualification. Learning the craft of public speaking would make this often dreaded component vastly easier and more enjoyable for students. Learning how to speak properly changed my life, and there is no reason why we can’t share this with everyone.Frances YoungLondonBartleby’s column reminded me of Jerry Seinfeld’s observation about public speaking being the number-one fear among Americans, even more than death. He quipped that if you were at a funeral you would probably rather be in the casket than giving the eulogy.Leo CottonBloomington, MinnesotaOne method to help with public speaking is to hold a model skull. It instantly casts you as a dramatic orator, and at least one listener is comfortably in the palm of your hand.Matt BurkhadtEast Norwich, New YorkThe Free exchange column on taxing the rich (May 17th) mentioned the intuitive belief that an extra dollar of wealth buys less additional happiness the richer you are, but it did not expound on why the rich do not willingly accept higher tax rates. Perhaps this proverb provides the explanation: “Wealth is like the hair in your nose. It hurts as much to part with a little as it does a lot.”Steve KishPleasanton, California