Leaders - Rachel Reeves’s big-government rhetoric is a worrying sign for Britain

The country needs defence spending and nuclear power, but not more social housing. IT WAS never going to be a glorious task. On June 11th Rachel Reeves, Britain’s chancellor of the exchequer, apportioned the spending for which she had budgeted. The government is so cash-strapped that most of its departments suffered in order to help the rickety National Health Service. To gloss over this, Ms Reeves delivered a tub-thumping speech in Parliament about the virtues of big government.At times the performance was ridiculous. The chancellor listed endless tiny projects, such as cash for Kirkcaldy’s high street and Southport’s pier, to make it sound as if she is showering the country with money. Yet the speech was also genuinely worrying. Suffering in the polls and menaced by Nigel Farage’s populist Reform UK, Labour seems to have decided that interventionism is a route to popularity. Even without the higher taxes or borrowing that Ms Reeves has forsworn, a statist turn, via regulation and the composition of spending, could do much damage.Ms Reeves pledged to “buy, make and sell more” at home, to make the country a “defence industrial superpower” and to ensure that “the energy technologies of the future are built here and owned here, and that those jobs come to Britain”. She will maintain a limit on bus fares and cap school-uniform prices. And she will adjust the Treasury’s methodology to favour “place-based business cases”: ie, to tilt infrastructure spending away from London, favouring redistribution over growth. The capital city, also known as the goose that lays Britain’s golden eggs, will be kept waiting for money to finance its Docklands Light Railway and Bakerloo Line projects.Some parts of the economy really do need more government. It is wise to boost defence spending in light of Russia’s aggression. Labour is also correct to throw its weight behind nuclear power by funding the new Sizewell C plant in Suffolk and investing in small modular reactors. Nuclear power is essential as Britain seeks to bring down its punishing energy costs while cutting its carbon emissions.The rest of the pivot to statism is unwelcome. The most harm could come where the stakes are highest: the housing market. A shortage of homes in the south-east of England chokes growth. Labour has incrementally loosened planning rules when a more radical deregulation is needed. Now the chancellor says she will use her capital budget to build lots of social housing, which the government heavily subsidises. This is a classic demand of British left-wingers, who resent the fact that reforms carried out under Margaret Thatcher have since the 1980s allowed social tenants to buy their houses at a discount.Yet social housing is a red herring. It already makes up a share of Britain’s housing stock that is about twice the average in the OECD, a club of mostly rich countries. Rules requiring developers to include “affordable” homes are one of many disincentives to private development, and reduce the average quality of new houses. As with most things, the state allocates homes inefficiently. Westminster Council recently announced that it would offer contracts for life to all its tenants, who enjoy below-market rents—an astonishing and indiscriminate giveaway. Ms Reeves touted that new homes would be built in Blackpool, Preston and Sheffield, where housing is far less scarce.Such are the mistakes when the state controls too much. It is good that Ms Reeves is not letting tax and spending rip, as many Labour backbenchers would like her to do. But even the chancellor’s shoestring statism could undermine the government’s pursuit of economic growth. ■Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.