Leaders - How to curb organised crime without shredding civil rights

Ecuador is a test case in the fight against global gangs. The gangsters are in their pomp. From the mangrove forests of Colombia and Brazil they launch 20-metre-long narco-submarines stuffed with cocaine and pilot them to Spain and America. They hide hundreds of tonnes of the drug in the crates that shift some 600m bananas through Ecuador’s ports every week. Across Latin America they rely on pliant judges and politicians, bought or terrorised. Cocaine production is soaring and illegal gold-mining is booming. Bodies are piling up amid a struggle to control billion-dollar businesses.So far efforts to curb the gangs have been dispiriting. This week in Colombia, where the government has pursued fruitless negotiations, police stations were bombed and a tough-on-gangs presidential contender, Miguel Uribe, was shot. El Salvador’s President Nayib Bukele has crushed the gangs but abandoned the rule of law. For six years under the previous president, Andrés Manuel López Obrador, Mexico avoided confronting gangs, leaving them free to traffic fentanyl and migrants over the northern border.Ecuador is the new front line. In recent years gangsters have transformed a peaceful Andean tourist spot into the murder capital of Latin America. Daniel Noboa, the Harvard-educated president whom we interview this week, has been re-elected on a promise to defeat them. The country is a crucial test case of whether national governments can beat back transnational organised crime without breaching the constraints of liberal democracy.The surest way to weaken drug gangs would be for the world to legalise drugs. But since that won’t happen, Mr Noboa must act. One measure would be to strengthen Ecuador’s civilian police. They need more weapons, armour and manpower to confront gangsters wielding machineguns and rocket launchers. This is under way, but will take time. Mr Noboa was right to put the army on the streets during the genuine emergency that erupted during his 18-month first term. But as the police grow stronger, he should pull the army back.Ecuador also needs an effective justice system. Jailing suspects indefinitely with no trial, as in El Salvador, reduces gang crime but means the state can also threaten anyone it chooses. Deterring gangsters lawfully involves consistently putting them before independent judges with enough evidence to convict them. For this, Mr Noboa needs to spend heavily to hire, train and protect prosecutors and judges, so they can stand up to wealthy criminal empires. A supercharged independent judiciary should also go after money-launderers and corrupt politicians. Mr Noboa acknowledges this. Now he must make it happen.The gangs move people, weapons and drugs over jungle borders and communicate via encrypted messaging. They can be held in check only if governments work together. That happens too little, partly because tired ideological differences get in the way. Thus, whereas gangs in Mexico and Ecuador are joined at the hip, the two governments speak only through Swiss intermediaries. They have been at odds since Ecuador raided the Mexican embassy in Quito last year to seize a former vice-president being sheltered there, who had been convicted of corruption.America could galvanise co-operation, which is in its interest as well as Latin America’s. So far President Donald Trump has lionised El Salvador’s police state. Far better for the West to support Mr Noboa with cash and intelligence, while watching for any authoritarian drift. Should he fail it would embolden the likes of Mr Bukele, who believe that organised crime can only be tackled with authoritarianism. ■Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.