The Americas - A Harvard man turned narco-gang-buster

Daniel Noboa assures The Economist he can save Ecuador without hurting democracy. The president loves jogging. Yet so determined are gangsters to kill Daniel Noboa that his runs require a military operation. As his motorcade of black SUVs and outriders sweeps back to his apartment after a morning run in Guayaquil, Ecuador’s biggest city, a swarm of heavily armed soldiers surrounds him. Mr Noboa and his wife, incongruous in colourful lycra, slip swiftly inside. “We’ve had death threats on a daily basis for two years,” he tells The Economist, matter-of-factly.Ecuador is deep in the bloody grip of transnational criminal gangs with links to Mexico, Colombia and Albania. They ship thousands of tons of cocaine, mostly made in Colombia, out of the country to Europe and the United States. Illegal mining and extortion bring in stacks more cash. Other Latin American countries have balked at taking on the gangs. Mr Noboa was recently re-elected on the promise to do just that. His efforts to make Ecuador safe again pose a crucial test that is about more than just one country: is it possible to beat back the rampant transnational gangs while respecting the rule of law and democracy?Ecuador’s descent into chaos has been shocking. In 2019 the murder rate was below seven per 100,000, similar to that of the United States. By 2023 it had surged to 45, making it the most violent country in mainland Latin America. The violence followed cocaine-export routes, which shifted to Ecuador to escape increased security at Colombian ports. Ecuador’s vast banana exports offered an ideal smuggling route, its dollarised economy a perfect conduit for laundering cash. Mr Noboa says gangs are moving about $30bn-worth of drugs through Ecuador every year, equivalent to a quarter of the country’s GDP. (Other estimates are smaller.)The man Ecuadorians have chosen to fight this storm is a curious mixture. Born in Miami, Mr Noboa is the son of a billionaire banana magnate who unsuccessfully ran for president of Ecuador five times. His social-media posts alternate between pictures posed with seized loot and cowed bad guys, and clips of him working out with his influencer wife: a crime-fighting Camelot for the TikTok age.In light of this, you might expect Mr Noboa to combine charm with the thinly veiled arrogance of privilege and chest-thumping alt-right machismo. Instead, the graduate of the Harvard Kennedy School of Government appears introverted, nervous and wonkish. He is keen to discuss Ecuador’s debt-to-GDP ratio and country-risk premium. He admits to doubts. “There are moments that you start questioning it,” he says when asked if the job is worth the risk. “Most of the time it feels right.”Mr Noboa was first elected president in October 2023 after the government of a conservative president, Guillermo Lasso, fell apart, prompting a snap election. Mr Noboa’s political experience was a short stint in the National Assembly. At just 35 years old, he was the youngest president ever elected in Latin America. Since then he has pushed legal limits to combat crime, governing through a series of states of exception and using his expanded powers to send the army onto the streets and into prisons. After gangs rioted in prisons and attacked journalists live on television in January 2024, he declared a state of “internal armed conflict”. He is building mega-prisons and has designated 22 gangs as “terrorist organisations”.After winning re-election in April, Mr Noboa is stepping up the crackdown. He is taking advice from Erik Prince, founder of Blackwater, a controversial mercenary group. Mr Noboa wants to bring in foreign troops, mentioning Israel and the United Arab Emirates. Mr Lasso says all this is “a bit of the pageantry of populism—like, ‘Look, I’m bringing in Iron Man, I’ve got Spider-Man’”. More serious is a new law that allows for drop-of-a-hat raids and asset seizures, increases sentences for organised-crime offences and gives the president greater discretion to declare an internal armed conflict. It reduces the powers of the Constitutional Court, which has blocked some state-of-emergency moves.So far, results have been underwhelming. Homicides fell by about 15% from 2023 to 2024, but have since surged, especially on the coast. The first months of 2025 were among the bloodiest on record (see chart). Beatriz García Nice, a policy analyst in Guayaquil, suggests Mr Noboa has weakened the gangs, prompting them to lash out in a last-ditch show of force. It is also possible his policy has broken up larger groups, spurring increased violence in the process. “The groups adapt, wars are not linear,” says Mr Noboa.The militarisation of law enforcement often comes with human-rights violations, for instance when four boys from Guayaquil were found dead near a military base in December after being seized by soldiers. Mr Noboa concedes there are risks to militarisation, but vows to prosecute soldiers who commit abuses. His new law, however, gives him more power to pardon them.Youthful and social-media-savvy, he is often compared to El Salvador’s president, Nayib Bukele, who has smashed local gangs with mass incarceration. Mr Noboa says he respects Mr Bukele, but laughs off the comparison as absurd. “We’re looking to promote public health and strengthen public education, so ideologically it’s a bit different, I would say, from Bukele.” Instead he compares himself to the presidents of France and Brazil, Emmanuel Macron and Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva. He expounds on the need to invest in education and create jobs for young men who are vulnerable to gang recruitment.Mr Noboa recognises that crushing transnational gangs requires cross-border collaboration. He is right, but his execution has so far been woeful. Last year he broke international law by ordering a raid on Mexico’s embassy to arrest a leftist former vice-president, Jorge Glas, who was sheltering there after a conviction for corruption. Any dialogue with Mexico now runs through Switzerland, admits Gabriela Sommerfeld, Ecuador’s foreign minister. That is a huge problem. Mr Noboa concedes as much, but claims collaboration is anyway difficult, seeing that Mexico is “not going to confront narcos”. He also struggles to work with President Gustavo Petro of Colombia who is pursuing “total peace” with his country’s gangs and armed groups, and has a resurgence of political violence to show for it.Instead he is cleaving to President Donald Trump for help. That is sensible enough, but Mr Trump’s America-first agenda means he is unlikely to send troops or reopen a military base in Ecuador. Mr Noboa is eager to change the constitution to permit such a course. Asked about security help from China, he does not rule it out.Another problem is that many institutions are either weak or compromised, from the justice system to the electoral authority, anti-money-laundering bodies and political parties. Judges and prosecutors, especially those in remote areas who inevitably handle cases relating to organised crime, lack adequate physical protection. At least 15 have been killed since 2022. Between 2020 and 2022 there were just three convictions for money-laundering.A strong, independent attorney-general will be crucial. Diana Salazar finished her six-year term in May, having led courageous prosecutions against gangsters and corrupt politicians. Worryingly, both groups will probably try to influence the selection of her successor, as well as that of judges. That could grant criminals dangerous impunity. It helps at least that Mr Noboa wants to speed up justice and vows to “follow the money”.He is in a strong position to carry out his plans. The leftist opposition is in disarray, his allies dominate the National Assembly and the courts will probably be wary of ruling against him, says Aparicio Caicedo, a former adviser to Mr Lasso. Some, however, fear that his security crackdowns and his eagerness to reform the constitution could see him turn authoritarian.Mr Noboa is quick to reject this idea. “I won’t stay one second more than what the constitution allows me. I will never ignore the importance of a parliament or the judicial branch, and I cannot go against the Constitutional Court,” he says. “That is what keeps this country civilised.” ■Editor’s note: You can read a lightly edited transcript of our interview with Mr Noboa here.Sign up to El Boletín, our subscriber-only newsletter on Latin America, to understand the forces shaping a fascinating and complex region.