The Americas - Political violence has returned to Colombia

On June 7th a presidential candidate was shot. On June 7th a 15-year-old gunman shot at Miguel Uribe, a senator from the right-wing Democratic Centre party, while he was campaigning in Bogotá, Colombia’s capital. He was hit in the head. The boy was arrested and charged with attempted murder. The 39-year-old Mr Uribe, a contender in next year’s presidential election, is in intensive care.The shooting is the most serious act of political violence in Colombia for 30 years. It recalls a brutal chapter in the country’s armed conflict between 1986 and 1990, when five presidential candidates were assassinated.Politicians of all stripes spoke out against violence in politics. Gustavo Petro, Colombia’s left-wing president, agreed to temper his tongue. Just a few days earlier he had labelled Mr Uribe “the grandson of a president who ordered the torture of 10,000 Colombians”. In protest, Mr Uribe’s supporters marched in Bogotá. Well-wishers held vigil outside the hospital.Violence erupted again on June 10th. At least eight people were killed in a wave of explosions and gun attacks across the south-west of the country. Bombs were planted at police stations in Cali, the third-largest city, with three officers among the dead.Armando Benedetti, the interior minister, said that whoever is responsible for these explosions may also be behind the shooting. The authorities are investigating a rebel group that operates on the Pacific coast, led by a warlord known as Iván Mordisco.Political violence in Colombia has been rising since 2022, but it has been largely contained at a local level. The brazen attack on a prominent politician in the capital suggests the perpetrators no longer fear repercussions.Like many Colombian politicians, Mr Uribe was shaped by the country’s history of armed conflict. When he was four years old, Pablo Escobar, a notorious drug baron, kidnapped his mother, a journalist. She was later killed. At a summit last week Mr Uribe said his ambition was for Colombia to be “a country without violence”.Now he is lying in hospital, a bullet in his skull, fighting for his life. ■Sign up to El Boletín, our subscriber-only newsletter on Latin America, to understand the forces shaping a fascinating and complex region.