United States - How a Christian group is changing education in America

LifeWise is growing fast, closing the gap between church and state. THE LESSON was on the crucifixion. The teacher asked the seven- and eight-year-olds to write down a list of their “most troublesome sins”. She had brought an example of a whip to show them how Jesus was tortured before his death. “There would have been no skin left on Jesus’s back. His ribs would have been exposed because once it takes your skin off, when they keep going it’s digging into your organs,” she said. After the beating his raw body rubbed against the cross. “Think of the splinters!” she exclaimed. The children sat mostly quietly as she told them that God could not look at Jesus because he was covered in sins. Soon time was up. Jesus would be resurrected, she reassured them, but that was for next class.The session was recorded by a concerned teacher’s aide just before Easter in a small Ohio town. The instruction was part of a weekly programme run by LifeWise Academy, a non-profit. LifeWise buses children from public schools to local churches during recess, gym, art, library and other elective classes to teach them the gospel during the school day, if parents opt in. Its instructors are a mix of retired teachers, pastors and local mums.Parents initiate bringing the programme into their schools and raise funds to pay LifeWise a startup fee. The group then provides red buses and a plug-and-play curriculum. It is no small enterprise. This year LifeWise operated in 585 school districts across 28 states and enrolled more than 44,000 students. By autumn, when school starts again, it will be in 982 districts in 33 states, an increase of nearly 70%. The group’s meteoric rise can also be measured in money. In 2023 LifeWise made a $4m surplus, according to tax filings. Last year the figure was $17m.Joel Penton, a former football player at Ohio State University, founded LifeWise six years ago. He was shocked to discover in 2018 that pupils in taxpayer-funded schools could legally be released for religious study, as long as classes weren’t taught on school grounds and students weren’t forced to go. Zorach v Clauson, a 1952 Supreme Court decision stemming from a New York City case, had set the boundaries. As a born-again Christian bent on evangelising, Mr Penton reckoned that “release time” might be “the single greatest missed opportunity to give access to the Bible to the next generation”. Mormons and Jews had done it, but not at scale. “That was the day I stopped sleeping,” he says. America’s public schools became his mission field.The classes, a handbook explains, are “designed primarily to engage unchurched students” rather than mimic traditional Sunday schools that just serve young Christians. Some parents are thrilled about the maverick model, as the soaring attendance numbers show, but others say LifeWise is pernicious. LifeWise students are taught to proselytise to their peers, which can pressure non-participants. A parent says her fourth-grader who opted out of LifeWise was bullied and called a “sinner” after she cussed during recess. A Jewish nine-year-old begged his parents to let him believe in Jesus so he could attend.Molly Gaines, a parent who lives in an Ohio town with seven churches and no grocery store, says that in poor rural places a LifeWise pizza party may be the only hot meal children get that week. “They’re preying on these kids who have hard lives and want to be a part of something,” she says.Ms Gaines and Zachary Parrish, an Indiana dad, co-founded the Secular Education Association, an advocacy group. They argue that LifeWise is crossing the lines laid out by the Supreme Court in Zorach. They have identified more than two dozen districts where school staff have promoted LifeWise, let the group fundraise on school property, included it on class schedules or rented it space. In some schools teachers are prohibited from teaching new materials while LifeWise students are away.Mr Penton says that LifeWise teaches love and kindness and that the organisation is careful not to break any laws. A study he commissioned found that school attendance and behaviour improved when LifeWise came to town. But state laws are also changing to accommodate the programme. Laws in 14 states say that school districts “may” allow for release time, while 16 say they “shall”. This year Montana, Iowa and Texas flipped to “shall”. LifeWise is advocating “for the strongest possible laws”, Mr Penton says, and building relationships with politicians “is a group effort”. He is in touch with First Liberty Institute and the Alliance Defending Freedom, two prominent Christian law firms, in case Zorach needs to be relitigated.On June 4th LifeWise received a cash prize for innovation from the Heritage Foundation, a think-tank close to the Trump administration. Kevin Roberts, Heritage’s president, praised them for “doing what the left fears most: telling the truth, defending the innocent, and rebuilding the institutions the radicals tried to burn down”. Danae Gambill, a LifeWise director in rural Georgia, saw her programme double in size this year. “Not everybody is going to agree with the things that are taught,” she says, “but that’s why it’s optional.” Reflecting on recent lessons about Jesus’s suffering, she adds that teaching children serious things, at the appropriate age, is important. “The topic of the crucifixion is not unicorns and rainbows but it’s the whole crux of our salvation,” she says. “No one is out here trying to scare kids.” ■Stay on top of American politics with The US in brief, our daily newsletter with fast analysis of the most important political news, and Checks and Balance, a weekly note from our Lexington columnist that examines the state of American democracy and the issues that matter to voters.