United States - Does America now have a woke right?

Members of the anti-woke coalition are turning against one another. THE HORSESHOE theory of politics—the idea that the far-left and far-right resemble each other—has performed admirably well in the Trump era. It gained fresh vindication in a recent squabble among intellectuals of the new right, as some accuse others of being part of the “woke right”, the mirror image of their hated opponents on the left.The most prominent accuser has been James Lindsay, an intellectual gadfly first of the left and lately of the right. He first came to prominence for the “grievance studies affair”, in which he and two co-authors submitted parody articles of leftist drivel, some of which successfully passed peer review. He recently conducted a similar prank by getting the thinly disguised introduction to Karl Marx’s “Communist Manifesto” published in a minor Christian publication (by substituting the words “Christian right” for “communism” and “liberalism” for “bourgeoisie”).To Mr Lindsay, this proved an intellectual kinship between right and left. In his other writings he has elaborated that the “woke right” adopts the oppressor and oppressed binary of the woke left, but inverts it by placing straight, white, Christian men as the victim of systemic injustice. Just as members of the woke left are fixated on systemic racism, the woke right thinks international liberalism is the structural explanation for their misfortune. This must be counteracted in strong terms, including through the use of cancellation.Although even Mr Lindsay concedes that the term “woke right” is imperfect, left-leaning critics of wokeness have leapt upon it, in part because of how effectively it irritates certain conservative thinkers. Yoram Hazony, a prominent proponent of national conservatism, wrote a lengthy post on X denouncing the term as “intentionally designed to be humiliating” and that “every anti-Marxist liberal using this term is being a shmuck”. Rod Dreher, an American conservative writer and admirer of Viktor Orban who now lives in Hungary, inadvertently provoked such a reaction when he wrote an essay for the Free Press titled “The Woke Right is Coming for Your Sons”. Mr Dreher meant to use the term “woke right” in a pejorative sense to denounce a different set of ideas—the antisemitism and white identity politics that he saw percolating among the new right.When his fellow national conservatives pointed out that Mr Lindsay had been attacking them as members of the “woke right”, Mr Dreher apologised for using the term. “I think that creating the phrase ‘woke right’ doesn’t actually help advance practical goals,” says Christopher Rufo, a prominent conservative activist. “There is right-wing antisemitism, right-wing conspiracism, a right-wing racialism. But the idea that these are somehow just mirror images of left-wing ideologies emerging in the 2010s and 2020s is not right at all.”There are other senses in which President Donald Trump’s administration has appropriated the tools of their enemies—ones that the internecine squabblers on the right have not dwelt much on. In waging its war against the universities, the administration is using civil-rights law on behalf of Jewish students, arguing that chants can make Jewish students feel unsafe, and that pro-Palestinian op-eds about Gaza in campus newspapers do so much harm to American foreign policy that their authors must be deported. The American right protested at the woke left when it sought to censor ideas by equating words with violence and prescribed swift punishment for wrongthink. Now, not so much.The squabbling suggests factionalism is growing among the new breed of conservative thinkers as they try to translate anti-wokeness into governing. Other terms may be more precise, for example “illiberal conservatism”, but these do not irk the ascendant thinkers on the right, who proudly label themselves as post-liberal. Richard Hanania, a conservative writer who has recently turned against Mr Trump, suggests that the term “MAGA Maoist” may be more apt, as it captures the Cultural Revolution tendencies of the administration. Whatever the term, infighting among Trump-curious thinkers is sure to follow. ■Stay on top of American politics with The US in brief, our daily newsletter with fast analysis of the most important political news, and Checks and Balance, a weekly note from our Lexington columnist that examines the state of American democracy and the issues that matter to voters.