United States - Donald Trump can call in the troops

His authority is broad even if his actions are inflammatory. IN 1957 nine African-American pupils attempted to register at Little Rock Central High School in Arkansas. The previously white-only school was belatedly complying with the Supreme Court’s decision in Brown v Board of Education, issued three years before. Yet, after braving a mob of some 300 who heckled and hissed, the students found their entry barred by members of the Arkansas National Guard, summoned by the segregationist governor, Orval Faubus. The president, Dwight Eisenhower, soon resolved the crisis by federalising the Arkansas National Guard, wresting it from the control of the governor. The very guardsmen who had been ordered to prevent the pupils’ attendance now escorted them into the building.Most Americans are only dimly aware of the many functions that the National Guard performs. Its long history predates the formation of the United States by more than a century. Recent events are forcing examination, though. On June 7th President Donald Trump federalised units of the California National Guard, over the strident objections of Gavin Newsom, the state’s governor. Mr Trump’s action came after deportation raids in Los Angeles provoked protests, some of them violent.Ordinarily, state national guards are under the control of governors. Most of their members hold civilian jobs for most of the year but can be mobilised for emergencies such as natural disasters or urban unrest. They are the modern-day versions of the colonial state militias; their role is enshrined in the constitution. Article I assigns to Congress the power “to provide for calling forth the Militia to execute the Laws of the Union, suppress Insurrections and repel Invasions”. Yet they also are reservists for the professional military services and can be commanded by the president and deployed abroad when needed.The very public spat between Mr Trump and Mr Newsom has prompted both sides to exaggerate the purpose of the mobilisation. The American military is not actually carrying out deportations. A long-standing principle of English common law is that troops are prohibited from carrying out domestic-law enforcement operations. In America this was formalised in the Posse Comitatus Act which bans the practice unless specifically authorised by Congress or the constitution.So far, Mr Trump has authorised a limited mission to the 4,000 members of the National Guard under his command that does not involve making arrests. They are to protect federal buildings and personnel. Department of Justice lawyers have long argued that presidents hold this so-called “protective power”. For Mr Trump to assign the guardsmen and recently deployed Marines tasks of keeping the peace, he would have to invoke another authority, like the Insurrection Act. This law, enacted in 1807, does not require the president to obtain the consent of a state’s governors to deploy troops there when “unlawful obstructions, combinations or assemblages, or rebellion against the authority of the United States, make it impractical to enforce the laws”. In this case, the president can use troops “as he considers necessary to enforce those laws or to suppress the rebellion”.What is different about Mr Trump’s deployment is that it seems to have inflamed the protesters in the name of keeping the peace. The state of California has filed suit, claiming that the president’s actions were illegal. Courts are generally reluctant to restrict presidential actions premised on national security, says Chris Mirasola, a law professor at the University of Houston. But even if they did, Mr Trump could easily invoke the Insurrection Act, which would then permit him to go further than he already has. Any ensuing violence would be treated as post-hoc justification for mustering troops in the first place. In such a case, it would also be harder for federal judges to intervene, for instance by declaring that the conditions of “insurrection” or “rebellion” had not been met. There is also risk of further contagion in American cities. On June 14th a military parade will be held in Washington, DC, that coincides with Mr Trump’s birthday. Protesters are agitating to bring out millions under the banner of “No Kings”.Neither Mr Newsom nor Mr Trump seems prepared to back down—perhaps because both find it in their political advantage for the spat to continue. Democrats may think that massive demonstrations of resistance empower them; Republicans think that the ultimate effect of the Black Lives Matter protests in 2020 after the murder of George Floyd was to their benefit. Mr Trump would certainly rather fight with his Democratic antagonists over immigration enforcement and imposing law and order, on which he believes the silent majority backs him, than reckon with his chaotic tariff policy or faltering diplomatic efforts. The president has extensive powers—ones that he is expected to exercise judiciously, in the broad interest of the country rather than the narrow interest of himself or his party. The question is not whether Mr Trump is acting legally—he probably is—but whether or not he has the self-restraint to act rightly. ■