China - China’s booze business looks smashed

First terrified officials went off the lash; now young people are going dry. Something was missing when Kweichow Moutai, the world’s most valuable spirits company, held its annual shareholder meeting in May. Participants were not served its famous baijiu, a fiery sorghum-based liquor. They supped on blueberry juice, instead. This was probably wise: China’s Communist Party is in the midst of yet another campaign to stamp out excessive drinking (and other sorts of extravagant behaviour) among Chinese officials. Last month the party banned alcohol entirely at official events; inspectors vowed zero tolerance. “One drink can make you lose your position,” an article in state media thundered.China’s appetite for booze is prodigious. In the early 2010s, party officials and businessmen cemented deals over baijiu-fuelled banquets; middle-class urbanites gave each other fancy foreign wines; revellers bought giant pyramids of beer bottles at karaoke bars. The crackdown on officials having fun is only one of a cocktail of factors that are now dragging down alcohol consumption. The country’s brewers and distillers are starting to prepare for a permanent drop in consumer spending, and generational shifts in tastes. Will they make it to the end of the night?China is still the world’s biggest market for booze. IWSR, a drinks data provider, reckons that in 2021 China necked around a fifth of all the world’s alcohol, producing about a quarter of global sales by value. But the outlook is grimmer than a pavement pizza. Production of baijiu, the country’s preferred tipple, has fallen by more than half since 2016, with demand at the lower end of the market slipping most. Production of beer, China’s second favourite drink, peaked in 2013. Companies tried to make up for lower volumes by selling pricier drinks but that strategy has dried up. Five of the seven biggest brewers in China saw sales fall last year. Sales of wine (never a mainstream pleasure) have slumped by two-thirds in five years.Politics is one explanation. The party is still obsessed with making its members, of whom there are about 100m, lead more sober lives. In March officials in Henan, a central province, were called to a training session detailing (among other things) why they needed to cut down on drinking. They had a boozy lunch, after which one of them died. These are exactly the kinds of stories that the party, which worries about its public image, is intent on stamping out. Years of campaigns are now having an impact: these days baijiu sales “are enough to keep the children fed but you can’t make much money any more”, says one gloomy shop-owner in Beijing.A sluggish economy is a second factor. Karaoke clubs, bars and restaurants closed in droves during years of tight lockdowns aimed at halting the spread of covid-19. Those that survived have had to deal with new problems. Households are choosing to save a higher share of their income than they did before the pandemic. A property crash, among other pressures, has caused consumer spending to plummet.The third factor dragging down alcohol consumption is that Chinese young people, like their peers in much of the world, are simply less keen on drink than previous generations. They tend to care more than their elders about clean living; they are more sceptical of labels, often slapped on Chinese liquor, that say it is good for your health. These youngsters have their own vices: lately China’s fast-growing coffee chains have wowed fashionable urbanites with questionable soft drinks, such as pork-flavoured lattes and oolong teapuccinos. But the highs craved by today’s young are mostly caffeine- and sugar-based.In particular, young people are rejecting China’s boozy workplace culture, which has historically required employees to down shots with the boss in order to get ahead. In the past it was not unthinkable to see “good drinker” listed among the requirements in job ads. But in 2021 a survey of some 600,000 young people by Chinese state-run media found that over 80% were “disgusted” with these traditions. Ren Lidong, a tattooed 22-year-old who runs an off-licence in Beijing, is scornful of the way many older Chinese drink. “It’s just seeing who can drink themselves to death first.”All this is good news for public health—but for the alcohol industry, it is a headache. For foreign drinkmakers, trade wars are worsening the pain. Between 2020 and 2024 China slapped tariffs ranging from 116% to 218% on Australian wine, causing imports to tumble. Last October customs officials raised levies on French cognac after Europe raised tariffs on Chinese electric vehicles—a big problem for the likes of Rémy Cointreau and Pernod Ricard. And this year American beer has also faced higher levies in retaliation for President Donald Trump’s tariffs on Chinese goods.What to do? Companies both foreign and local are slashing prices. The retail price of a canned cocktail has slipped from over 13 yuan ($1.80) in 2022 to under ten yuan today, says Loren Heinold, who owns a business in Beijing that makes them. “That’s where the market has moved and everybody has moved with it, because the people that didn’t are dead.” Bud APAC, the listed Asian subsidiary of the world’s biggest brewer, AB InBev, is betting on its cheaper “sub-premium” brands to help its China business. It is also hoping more drinking at home will make up for declining sales in restaurants. Many off-licences will deliver a drink to nearby addresses within 30 minutes.Some firms are hoping to hook young Chinese with novel tipples. In 2019, Bottle Planet, a distiller based in the south-western city of Chongqing, started selling a plum wine with a relatively low alcohol content that it hopes will tempt young women. Sales rose 30% last year, according to media reports. Kweichow Moutai is trying hard to shake its somewhat fusty image. Over the past three years, in partnership with other Chinese brands, it has launched baijiu-flavoured ice cream, coffee and chocolates.China’s shrivelled alcohol market is now driven by “real” demand from people who actually enjoy drinking, reckons Ian Dai, a businessman in Shanghai. His wine firm sold around 40,000 bottles in the past 12 months, mainly to young urban professionals. “Before, you didn’t have a choice to drink. Like it or not, you just had to.” China’s boozers are fewer and pickier than before. But they may be having more fun. ■Subscribers can sign up to Drum Tower, our new weekly newsletter, to understand what the world makes of China—and what China makes of the world.