Asia - Fading Modi-momentum 

The BJP’s appetite for bold reforms has waned. IN THE LEAD-up to India’s general election last year, Narendra Modi instructed ministers to prepare plans for the first 100 days of an all-but-certain third stint in power. The new government completed a year in office on June 9th. What has it achieved so far?In some respects things are going reasonably well, including the economy. In the most recent quarter growth was 7.4% year on year, beating expectations. The country’s gdp is forecast to become bigger than Japan’s this year. For a long time India was financially fragile. Today the current-account deficit is a low 1.1% of GDP and its huge capital markets can absorb big shocks. Inflation has cooled, helping the poor and allowing the central bank to announce a cut of half a percentage point in interest rates on June 6th. Forecasts of a good monsoon season augur well for rural incomes.Politically, Mr Modi’s Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) has pushed through a contentious law on Muslim endowments, chalking up a legislative victory. The armed forces struck harder and deeper into Pakistan than ever before in the recent conflict following terror attacks in Indian-controlled Kashmir, although they did lose some materiel. There was a rally-round-the-flag effect, boosting Mr Modi. India has just signed a trade deal with Britain, is finalising one with America and has accelerated talks with the EU. For a trade-deal-shy country, that is serious progress.Now for the bad news. Even if India keeps up its annual growth rate of about 6.5%—which is what the central bank forecasts—it would still need to do much better to create enough jobs or achieve Mr Modi’s stated goal of making India an upper-income country by 2047. Legislatively the BJP has hit several obstacles. A sensible if ill-designed change to capital-gains tax had to be partially reversed after an outcry. A media bill meant to cow independent YouTubers was put on the back burner. A bill to synchronise state and central elections was kicked into the long grass.Meanwhile the India-America relationship is proving trickier than Mr Modi probably hoped. India has not been spared the threat of high tariffs, or President Donald Trump jawboning American firms, including Apple, to repatriate activity from India. Mr Trump’s insistence that he brokered a ceasefire between India and Pakistan went down badly. The implicit parity he drew between the world’s fourth-biggest economy and a near-bankrupt state wracked by terrorism and run by its army is viewed with barely concealed outrage in Delhi. Despite his declaration of friendship for Mr Modi, and vice versa, the American president seemed not to care what India felt.If India is to speed up its growth and gain more global clout it needs to find a new way to create jobs, relying more on urbanisation and services rather than just factories and trade. That will require the government to tackle long-festering problems. It is still all too often a nightmare to start or do business: modernising land and labour laws would help. India needs to confront reform of its deeply backward agricultural industry. Modernising farms and creating new businesses would lead to more of the good jobs Indians crave.Yet there has been little action on this front. The prime minister may believe his domestic agenda has been stymied by the loss of the BJP’s parliamentary majority in last year’s election. Mr Modi must now rule with coalition partners, which mostly act as a check on his autocratic tendencies. Yet having to rule with troublesome allies is no excuse. Some of India’s most significant achievements occurred under minority or coalition governments. Instead Mr Modi and his party are suffering from a lack of imagination. After 11 years in power, the BJP appears to be running out of ideas.What is Mr Modi’s priority for the remaining four years of his term? That is still an open question but there are some signals. On June 4th the government announced it would hold a long-delayed census in 2027. Having reliable data with which to make policy would be a huge relief. Yet the timing is telling. The next election is in 2029.After the census India can by law overhaul the boundaries of its electoral districts for the first time in half a century. The poor, populous north, where the BJP is popular, may gain more seats in parliament at the expense of the prosperous south, where the party struggles. The census signals the BJP wants to keep power; what is missing is bold thinking about how to use it. ■Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.