China - Bride prices are surging in China

Why is the government struggling to curb them?. MARRIAGE IN CHINA can be mercenary. “Is 380,000 yuan a lot for a bride price?” a woman in Guangdong asks on a social-media site. She is thinking of getting married, and wants to know how much her fiancé’s family should pay for her hand. The sum she is suggesting, equivalent to nearly $53,000, is more than seven times her annual wage. Thousands reply; many say she should demand more. “Sis, life is your own, don’t wrong yourself, at least ask for 888,800,” says one.In many countries the custom of paying a “bride price” has faded as people have become richer. Not in China, where the practice remains deeply entrenched. In some parts of the country bride prices are an endowment passed by the groom’s parents to the newlyweds. In others, it is a compensation paid entirely to the bride’s family. In both cases, the amounts involved are going up.The median bride price for marriages in the countryside doubled in real terms between 2005 and 2020, according to a recent paper by Yifeng Wan of Johns Hopkins University. Prices in urban areas are rising, too. A bride price of 380,000 yuan would indeed be steep in Guangdong province, where the median was about 42,000 yuan when last estimated. But it would look a bit less outrageous in neighbouring Fujian, where 115,000 yuan is the norm.The government disapproves. It wants more marriages, in part to boost China’s low birth rate. Lofty bride prices do not help with that. Officials desire in particular to curb them in the countryside, where they are very high, relative to incomes. Sometimes acquiring the necessary money can plunge a groom’s family into poverty.Since 2019 the Communist Party has routinely called for efforts to tackle the problem. Yet little progress has been made—even though Chinese law bans “the exaction of money or gifts in connection with marriage”. Village officials often avoid interfering, out of respect for local custom and for fear of getting caught between bickering families. Various places have introduced caps, but these are sometimes high: 50,000-80,000 yuan in parts of Gansu province, for example.In May state media said Gansu’s government had circulated a plan to “effectively control” high bride-prices by the end of this year and “gradually reduce” them in 2026. But the measures in its plan look fairly meagre: there seem to be no penalties. The desperation of some men for a bride is a big obstacle to change. There is a huge imbalance of the sexes: by 2027 China will have 119 men for every 100 women in peak marrying-age groups. Women, too, resist reform. Many see bride prices as a hedge against divorce (marriages in China fail more often than in America). Should the marriage end, part of the bride price might be returned. But a big share can remain with the female divorcee.Some Chinese argue that bride prices commodify women. In recent weeks men and women have been fighting online over a case involving a man convicted of raping his fiancée after his family made a betrothal gift of 100,000 yuan: some dinosaurs say that accepting such sums implies consent to sex. But many Chinese are coolly pragmatic about demands for cash. “Money is the foundation of everything,” writes one woman on Weibo, a social-media site: “You might not care about it in your heart, but if the other side doesn’t even want to give it, that’s a problem.” ■Subscribers can sign up to Drum Tower, our new weekly newsletter, to understand what the world makes of China—and what China makes of the world.