Middle East & Africa - Conspiracy, cock-up or solution? The Gaza aid foundation

If it survives it will be an instrument of power in the strip. When hunger gnaws, any offer of food comes as a relief. And so just before dawn on June 1st Ayman, a former taxi-driver from northern Gaza displaced seven times since the start of the war, left his tent on the beach. He and his brother walked 5km through the rubble to the edge of the remains of Gaza’s southern city, Rafah, and what they had been told was a new American food distribution centre there. They filed through a wire-mesh corridor towards a line of armed private-security contractors, some American, some speaking Arabic, who guarded piles of cardboard boxes filled with food. But the hungry Palestinians far outnumbered the boxes, Ayman says, and chaos erupted. Shots were fired; subsequent reports suggest some 30 people were killed. He and his brother have avoided the hubs ever since.Between early March and mid-May Israel blocked all aid from entering Gaza. Even officers in the Israel Defence Forces (idf) acknowledged that Gazans were about to run out of food. In May Israel announced its solution: the Gaza Humanitarian Foundation (ghf), an opaque group, would run a network of aid-distribution hubs. So far, Israel has established three such centres south of the Morag corridor, a security strip in southern Gaza, and a fourth near Gaza City, in the north.Israel’s use of aid as a weapon of war has provoked outrage. It has prevented essential supplies from entering Gaza. And yet its new effort to distribute aid is also proving deeply controversial. Hamas says it is a front for the idf. International aid organisations have decried it. What is this new network and what is it trying to do?The ghf was registered in Delaware, in America, two weeks after Donald Trump took office. Its address is that of a company in Delaware that incorporates firms. It is thought to have received $150m of funding so far. Much of that has gone on hiring mercenaries, some from American private-security firms. Israeli officials refuse to say who is funding it. Even the hardline finance minister, Bezalel Smotrich, claims to be unaware of who is paying for it. But the consensus is that the money comes from within Israel. Avigdor Lieberman, an opposition mp and former finance minister, reckons the paymaster is the Israeli state.Hopes of American government funding have dwindled following the repeated violence and horrifying scenes of hungry men scaling the fences at the hubs. The Boston Consulting Group helped draw up the plan for the group but has since distanced itself from it. The foundation’s first director resigned, protesting that it breached humanitarian principles. Its new boss is an evangelical preacher close to Mr Trump, Johnnie Moore, who is still bullish. “We delivered almost 11m meals last week,” says Mr Moore. “It’s one of the most complex humanitarian missions of our time.” He denies the ghf is a tool of Israel. “All the funding is not, is not from Israel.” And he says the goal of replacing a corrupt un system is consistent with the White House’s vision. “The president made a promise to get aid through a different mechanism to the people of Gaza.”Distributing aid in a devastated and dangerous war zone is nightmarishly difficult. So far the ghf’s performance has been dismal. Foreign mercenaries guard the food inside the compounds, while Israeli forces defend the perimeter and the convoy routes. Shots have been fired at those coming to collect aid almost daily. The un says over 200 people have been killed. The idf, Hamas and armed gangs have all been blamed; independent analysis of some of the shootings points to Israeli troops. On June 11th at least five ghf workers were shot and killed; the group has blamed Hamas. Relief has become a death trap, says Philippe Lazzarini, the head of the un’s agency for Palestinians.Israel defends the new network, saying it will stop Hamas from controlling the flow of aid to tighten its grip on the civilian population. Israeli officials say that gaining control of aid is crucial to winning the war. They claim that Hamas made between $0.5bn and $1bn from stealing aid last year, though they have provided no backing for these figures. Other sources reckon Hamas’s income was $1bn last year, mostly from foreign earnings.Hamas has attempted to interfere with the un’s supply lines. In the early months of the war, its gunmen raided a number of un warehouses, say diplomats. It also apparently shook down traders involved in profiteering. Biting shortages mean flour and canned foods sell for 20 times their pre-war rates. It has found other means of raising income. In April 2024 it raided banks in Gaza, stealing over $100m.The ghf’s model of hubs has not eliminated abuse. The rations are already being resold. Nothing prevents repeat visits. Nor is the new system working fairly for ordinary Gazans. It has no safeguards to ensure aid reaches the neediest. The most vulnerable cannot travel long distances through a war zone to distant hubs.Contrast that with the un’s food-distribution network. It reached 1.1m people through 400 local hubs. It was not perfect. It operated with the tacit or explicit co-operation of Hamas, who have ruled Gaza since 2007. A lot of the aid was resold. But handouts were registered. Families received text messages telling them when to collect aid. The incapacitated relied on a Deliveroo-style delivery service. Medicine and tents were distributed as well as food.What happens next? In one scenario the foundation will prove to be transitory. If the violence continues and it proves unable to alleviate Gazans’ suffering, it might collapse in weeks. And if there is a ceasefire and Israeli troops withdraw from much of Gaza, the hubs would be unprotected and the scheme might be abandoned, with the un regaining its dominant role.But the other scenario is that the foundation has staying power and becomes an ongoing feature of Gaza and an instrument of power there. The end of the old distribution system probably does weaken Hamas, which is not making enough money to keep itself going. Salary payments for its 50,000 public-sector workers have all but ceased. Alongside the ghf Israel may be trying to create multiple channels of aid into Gaza. Between May 19th, when it slightly eased its blockade, and June 5th, it let around 1,300 aid lorries enter through the un network. It may also be allowing some private contractors to get food in, as well as a gang in the south.If the ghf does last, a more troubling question arises. It is already being used to corral Palestinians into slivers of land. Sober military types fear mission creep and that the ghf will become a long-term tool of occupation, resettlement and ethnic cleansing. Far-right politicians, including Mr Smotrich, who praise the work of the foundation, talk openly of their plans to resettle Gaza. Binyamin Netanyahu, Israel’s prime minister, has spoken of creating “a sterile zone” for Palestinians around the distribution hubs near the border with Egypt. Israel continues to drop evacuation notices and push Palestinians towards the sea. All but 19% of Gaza is now an Israeli militarised zone or subject to displacement orders (see map). Over 55,000 have been killed. For nearly two years Gazans have clung to the hope of a ceasefire. Now many just want out. “If Israel opened the gates to Egypt,” suggests Ayman, back in his beach camp, “80% would leave.” ■Sign up to the Middle East Dispatch, a weekly newsletter that keeps you in the loop on a fascinating, complex and consequential part of the world.