Asia - If China invaded Taiwan, who would enter the war?

Japan and the Philippines would struggle to stay out. But what about the rest?. “THE ELEPHANT in the room”, acknowledged Emmanuel Macron, France’s president, speaking to an audience of defence bigwigs at the Shangri-La Dialogue in Singapore on May 30th, “is the day China decides a big [military] operation.” Would France intervene on day one of such a war, he mused? “I would be very cautious today.”Mr Macron’s ambivalence is widely shared. If China were to invade Taiwan, no one is certain how different countries would line up. A new paper by the Centre for a New American Security (CNAS), a think-tank in Washington, examines that question. If America stayed out of the war, it suggests, everyone else would, too. Speaking in Singapore, Pete Hegseth, America’s defence secretary, sought to dispel that thought. “Any attempt by Communist China to conquer Taiwan by force would result in devastating consequences,” he said. “Our goal is to prevent war, to make the costs too high.”In practice, many Asian allies fear that America is getting wobblier on the issue. Last year Donald Trump said that he would “have to negotiate things” before coming to the island’s aid; some in the Pentagon see the Taiwanese as perhaps even a lost cause.If America does step in, the two allies most severely affected would be Japan and the Philippines. Neither country would be enthusiastic about direct involvement, though. Japan’s participation would be unlikely to go much further than submarine patrols or missile strikes, argues CNAS. The Philippines, which has 175,000 citizens in Taiwan, would be more cautious still. But if China’s armed forces were bogged down, it could be tempted to grab territory in the South China Sea, where it has multiple disputes with China, suggest the authors. All this would depend on whether China had first attacked American bases in those two countries to pre-empt American involvement or whether it held back, hoping to secure American neutrality.A second group of countries—South Korea, Australia and India—would be more insulated. But America would put pressure on each one to help. South Korea’s immediate concern would be deterring North Korea from exploiting any diversion of American forces. The country might offer “rear-area support”, such as logistical assistance, reckons CNAS.Australia has become an increasingly important base for American forces, too. It has not formally pledged to join a war over Taiwan, even in private. But Australian officials acknowledge that their relationship with America, including the AUKUS nuclear submarine pact, could be in jeopardy if they stayed out. India would almost certainly focus on defending its land border with China, but America could probably count on co-operation on intelligence and anti-submarine warfare.Then there is South-East Asia. Around 900,000 passport-holders from the region live and work in Taiwan, notes CNAS, accounting for 90% of foreign citizens there. Many countries would probably attempt to remain neutral, not least because China is by far the most important trading partner for most of the region. But America would probably push for access to Thai and Singaporean air and naval bases.What about Europe? France and Italy have recently sent aircraft-carriers to the region; Britain has one en route. In private, European policymakers are increasingly concerned about a Chinese invasion of Taiwan. A handful could offer cyber and space capabilities. More consequential would be a decision by the EU to impose sanctions on China. In particular, writes Agathe Demarais of the European Council on Foreign Relations, another think-tank, a ban on Chinese imports to Europe “could be game-changing”. For now that is an exceedingly tall order. ■