The Americas - Bolivia wants the world to stop treating coca leaves like drugs 

The WHO is reviewing whether the crop should be removed from international drug-control schedules. If New York runs on coffee, Cochabamba runs on coca. The leaves—which can be chewed as a mild stimulant, but also processed into cocaine—are everywhere: spread out by the road to dry; sold in bags alongside sweets and SIM cards; stuffed in cheeks as golf-ball-sized bolos. “With a bolo I can drive all night,” boasts one trucker, with a flash of leaf-flecked teeth.Bolivia is one of very few countries with a legal market for coca. In the rest of the world it is controlled with the same stringency as cocaine and heroin. The Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, an international treaty adopted by the United Nations in 1961, lists coca leaf as a “Schedule I” substance, one considered to come with a high risk of abuse and to pose a serious public health threat. Some consider that to be a historic mistake. It might soon change. A review by the World Health Organisation (WHO), which will conclude in October, may recommend that coca be bumped down to Schedule II, or removed from the schedules altogether. The latter would be a first. The prospect is causing hope and anxiety in equal measure.Andeans have chewed coca for millennia. The Spanish noticed that it kept workers going in the silver mines of Potosí, but saw it as an indigenous vice. Such attitudes persisted well into the 20th century, when the WHO described coca chewing as a “social evil”. When the cocaine business took off, coca’s status as an internationally controlled substance was cemented.Bolivia never seriously tried to abolish traditional uses of the coca leaf. Like Peru and Colombia, the other main coca-growing countries, it created broad exemptions under national law. Then, in 2013, it negotiated a partial opt-out from the convention. Now it wants coca taken off the drug schedules altogether; it was Bolivia that requested the WHO review. Other treaty articles mean coca would still be controlled to prevent it being used for making cocaine. But de-scheduling would make it easier to develop coca-based products and sell them abroad. Proponents hope it would be a boon for rural development.Bolivia already has a lively coca economy. The law allows 22,000 hectares of coca fields to feed the legal market. And Bolivians have cooked up new ways to consume coca. In one garage factory, a woman sprinkles leaves with caffeine and fruity flavourings and puts it under a power hammer. The result: coca machucada, an amped-up version of the sacred leaf. Such products have helped win over new consumers, bringing a rural habit to the urban middle class. There is even an “executive bolo”: sachets of ground coca for those anxious about leaves in their teeth.If coca were de-scheduled, the hope is that the legal international market would boom. Bolivia could start exporting existing products such as coca tea, flour and sweets. But de-scheduling could also boost investment in the leaf. Bolivia’s state-led efforts to industrialise coca for the domestic market failed. But the prospect of a global market could entice investment from companies to create new products, from energy drinks for health nuts to new versions of tipples like Vin Mariani, which mixed Peruvian coca with Bordeaux wine for 19th-century consumers such as Queen Victoria and Pope Leo XIII.Bolivian coca growers worry that the profits would be gobbled up by international companies. Proponents say the idea would be to legally limit coca cultivation to Bolivia, Peru and Colombia, and to ensure locals benefit from any use of their genetic resources. One template could be the agreement that sees the rooibos tea industry pay a percentage of revenues to indigenous people in South Africa who used the plant before it was industrialised. But Bolivians still worry that industrial-scale coca farming might squeeze them out.Another fear is that de-scheduling coca would lead to a surge in cultivation that was bound in theory for legal markets, but in practice used to make cocaine. Such diversion already happens with part of Bolivia’s legal production. But while demand for cocaine exists, there will always be an incentive to grow coca for that purpose. And there is evidently no shortage of coca for cocaine under existing laws (see chart). Much would depend on the emergence of new regulatory systems.If the WHO recommends changing coca’s treaty status, the 53-member UN Commission on Narcotic Drugs will then vote on the question. The diplomatic environment is challenging. The cocaine market is growing, fuelling destructive gangs. Peru opposes de-scheduling. A winning majority would probably need the bloc vote of the European Union, two-thirds of Latin America and the Caribbean, and some unexpected alliances. “It will be tough,” said Andrés López Velasco, a drug-policy expert. “But it’s not impossible.” ■Sign up to El Boletín, our subscriber-only newsletter on Latin America, to understand the forces shaping a fascinating and complex region.