Europe - How Ireland became the Saudi Arabia of siphoned-off global profits

The Emerald petro-state is riding high off tech and pharma—for now. Europe got an unexpected dose of good news on June 6th: its economy turns out to have been growing twice as fast as had been previously thought. Granted, the new figure is a modest 0.6% rise in GDP in the first quarter compared with the prior one, but Europe takes what it can get these days. Was this a sign of German or French revival after years of lethargy? Not quite. Look at the fine print and a single statistic stands out: a 9.7% bump in the GDP of Ireland. A country of around one-hundredth of the population of the European Union was responsible for over half the entire bloc’s growth. A casual observer of economic statistics might surmise Ireland had accidentally struck oil while nobody noticed.The truth is not so far removed. Ireland in recent years has seen its GDP balloon for reasons unrelated to what its workforce is up to. The unexpected fortune stems not from oil, but from global tax-shifting. Big multinational firms have found this damp corner of Europe a good place to book profits made from their globe-spanning operations. Tech giants like Apple or Microsoft transfer intellectual-property rights—some of the most valuable in the world—to Irish subsidiaries, which use them to collect royalties from higher-tax jurisdictions beyond both Ireland and America. Pharma groups use a similar trick, but also manufacture blockbuster drugs (though they may well have been developed by American companies in America) in Ireland. Through a web of royalties and licensing fees, accountants as versed in the arts of surreal creativity as James Joyce can magic away profits to Ireland, which taxes them at just 12.5% a year, one of the world’s lowest rates.The great profit migration has three impacts on Ireland. One is to distort GDP so far beyond recognition that Irish officials use their own measures for growth. Far more real is the corporate tax from foreign firms that flows to the exchequer in Dublin. At €20bn ($23bn) a year and rising, it may not be Saudi-level, but it is enough to cover the cost of schools and hospitals, says the Irish Fiscal Advisory Council, an official watchdog. Those inflows are supplemented by local employment by foreign firms—whether in far-flung pharma plants or in downtown Dublin tech offices—which accounts for 11% of the workforce and a third of income tax.Alas, the trick may have become too good. For the upshot of Ireland’s tax grab is that others are losing out. America, notably, has good reason to gripe. Beyond the profits it might have taxed itself, a side-effect of this transatlantic profit odyssey is to produce the appearance of huge goods exports as, say, Viagra pills developed in America are sold to Americans via Cork. Illusory though it is, America’s massive goods deficit with Ireland—the biggest after those with China, Mexico and Vietnam, all rather larger economies than Ireland—is a problem these days. President Donald Trump equates goods imports with the theft of American jobs, and ignores Ireland’s even bigger services payments to America, which are also related to the tax-arbitrage game. What is usually a friendly St Patrick’s Day visit to the White House by the taoiseach—the Irish equivalent of prime minister, a word whose pronunciation is as unfathomable to outsiders as Irish tax accounting—in March got a little frosty as Mr Trump told Micheál Martin that America had been “stupid” in its dealings with Ireland. A rare president not to claim Irish parentage, Mr Trump failed to mention that attempts to end the Irish tax shifting in his first term helped turbocharge them instead.Europeans are also peeved. The “reciprocal tariffs” Mr Trump threatened in April are based on a (bonkers) formula that includes only trade in goods, which Ireland’s tax shenanigans inflate. Had it not been a member of the EU, the formula would have resulted in tariffs of 15%, not 20%. To some in the eu the solution is obvious: America should cut its goods-trade deficit with Europe by shafting Ireland on tax, not imposing tariffs on all EU firms. Perhaps unsurprisingly, Charlemagne found Irish government officials reluctant to discuss tax matters when he visited recently, as if the entire finance ministry was busy washing its hair. But arguments heard in Dublin pubs and boardrooms provided hints as to the official line. Ireland cannot be compared to a tax haven, as American multinationals have “substance” there that justifies shifting lots of revenues—and therefore profits—to its shores. That is true, up to a point, says Aidan Regan at University College Dublin for whom “The scale of profits booked in Ireland far exceeds the substance of local operations.” Kevin Timoney of Davy, a financial firm, says that even absent tax shenanigans Ireland would be well positioned thanks to its trained workforce, access to the EU market and openness to foreign capital.Unearned bonanzas can be a mixed blessing. Dubliners gripe that the presence of Googlers and their ilk has exacerbated a housing shortage. The Irish Fiscal Advisory Council has warned of Ireland falling prey to “Dutch disease”, the imbalance that struck the Netherlands in the 1970s as natural-gas money sent the rest of its economy off-kilter. Unlike oil, nobody knows when the fiscal bonanza will run out. Just three companies accounted for 38% of all corporate-tax receipts in 2023, leaving Ireland exposed to the success of foreign firms over which it has no sway.Nobody knows either how Mr Trump might change tax rules or impose tariffs to Ireland’s detriment. Ideally the authorities there should have squirrelled away their tax windfall in a long-term fund, as Norway did with its oil revenues, better to manage if the windfall ends. In practice, says Dan O’Brien of the Institute of International and European Affairs in Dublin, only about a tenth of the €160bn earned in the past decade from corporation tax has been saved. A mix of pluck and luck has been good to the Irish. They will have to hope their good fortune can endure. ■Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.