Britain - Rachel Reeves has decided where Britain’s cash will go

Answer: hospitals and tanks. For almost an hour on June 11th the House of Commons felt like a bingo hall, or perhaps an auction house. Rachel Reeves reeled off a dizzying list of wildly varying numbers and time horizons, covering programme after programme funded in Britain’s spending review. Over the next five years, £14bn ($19bn) would go to a new nuclear plant. Over a decade, trains in Wales would get £445m. Each year, £280m more would go to border security.To hear the chancellor tell it, almost every corner of the British state was to be showered with cash and attention. All that razzle-dazzle served a purpose: to pull eyes away from the harsh trade-offs the government had actually made in allocating money across departments (see chart). A year after taking charge, the Labour Party has had to lay out in stark monetary terms what it most cares about. Departments already knew how much funding to expect up to March 2026, but the spending review filled in the picture to March 2029, covering nearly all of the current parliament.By far the largest slug of new money went to the National Health Service (NHS). The budget for day-to-day health-care spending and social care is to rise by 2.7% per year in inflation-adjusted terms over the three years covered by the spending review. That compares with near-flat day-to-day spending elsewhere over the same period, or slightly negative after taking population growth into account.The NHS is hardly alone in creaking. Nearly every British public service is. But the NHS is totemic, both for voters and for Labour, which has pledged to clear waiting lists by the next election. Troublingly, the NHS also has a long record of swallowing up personnel and money. This time a chunk of the fresh cash will go straight to higher pay settlements for doctors and nurses. Health spending in Britain has risen faster than economic growth for decades now, reaching 8% of GDP, up from 4% in the 1990s. Labour is betting that a bit more money, coupled with reform, will be enough to deliver a perceptible improvement by the next election.A clear loser is the Home Office, the department responsible for policing, immigration and security. Day-to-day spending is set to fall by 1.7% in real terms over the review period. That decline bakes in the government’s ambition to rein in spending on the asylum system, mainly by (over the next four years) ending the expensive practice of keeping asylum-seekers in hotels. The Conservatives tried and failed to get those costs down. There is little sign Labour is doing much better.Those totals also rely on saving 10% or more in administrative costs in each department. The government hopes for a “greater embedding of a cost-conscious culture across Whitehall”. Though the civil service may not be an obvious hotbed of efficiency, several previous governments have already had a serious go at chopping those same costs down.On the capital-investment side, the main winner is defence. The government reaffirmed its plans to raise defence spending (including on the intelligence services) to 2.6% of GDP by 2027, from a little over 2% in 2023. That increase will be delivered mainly through more investment, a category of spending where the government has more leeway with its fiscal rules. Getting spending up to 3% of GDP or beyond remains a broad, but not funded, medium-term ambition. That degree of vagueness may well not survive sabre-rattling from the White House, or even the NATO summit later this month.Putting the investment uplift on defence pokes a hole in the narrative of last October’s budget: that Labour is investing to grow the economy. Tanks and munitions are certainly valuable militarily, but do far less to raise Britain’s productivity than roads, railways or power stations. The review nudged up transport investment for the period between 2025-26 and 2029-30, but not by much. Energy did get a hefty rise. That includes the cost of Sizewell C, a nuclear-power plant due to open in 2033. The government is the majority shareholder in the project. Persuading the private sector to make big investments in nuclear power in Britain has become challenging, given the regulatory maze and sprawling costs that prior projects have faced.Ms Reeves also touted an extra £4bn a year for affordable housing, though the bulk of that comes by reallocating the Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government’s capital budget, not by finding new funds. As with defence, that spending will not do a vast amount to raise growth, but does indicate a worrying revival in Labour’s more statist instincts.The government wants to tell a story of renewal, of a painful first year starting to pay off. Certainly, the spending funded by Labour’s much-grumbled-over tax rises will start visibly landing soon. But even putting Ms Reeves’s jumbled barrage of spending figures aside, the review still had the slight air of a mirage. The overall totals were based on forecasts finalised before Donald Trump’s catastrophic “Liberation Day” tariffs. The Office for Budget Responsibility, the fiscal watchdog, may soon revise down its unusually optimistic growth projections. Those realities will hit at the next budget, due in the autumn, and could be painful. If they are, no amount of rhetorical trickery will be able to conceal the need for tax rises, spending cuts or more borrowing. ■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in Britain, sign up to Blighty, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.