Europe - The cities winning from war 

Armaments manufacturing revives a trio of towns in Europe. The cobbled town of Bourges lies in France’s “empty diagonal”: the central swathe of farmland that city folk zoom past on their way to somewhere else. In 1860 Napoleon III decided to build a cannon foundry and arsenal there, a place safely remote from France’s fragile eastern borders. Home to just 64,000 people, Bourges was until recently bleeding jobs as its modern weapons-makers lost orders. “There was a long period of depression,” recalls Serge Richard, head of the local chamber of commerce.Today, however, Bourges is on the cusp of a remarkable revival. Europe’s governments are hiking defence spending in the face of Russian aggression and American volatility. Defence-dependent towns, long used to industrial decline, are preparing for the opposite. Three places, in France, Germany and Poland, illustrate the huge potential, but also the strains it can bring.Bourges is bracing for a boom. Two big European defence firms already operate factories there: MBDA, a European company that makes missiles and missile systems, and KNDS, a Franco-German one that manufactures the CAESAR howitzer and 155mm shells. Together, they are expected to invest a massive €1bn ($1.1bn) locally over the next five years. When told of the sums, “I nearly fell off my chair,” says Yann Galut, the town’s left-wing mayor. “A billion euros: can you believe it?”On the town’s outskirts MBDA is demolishing old buildings on a site next door to its existing premises with a view to expansion. Across town KNDS has tripled the output of CAESARs since 2022. Together the firms are expected to add 2,500 jobs over the next five years. The effects reach beyond Bourges to the dozens of small sub-contractors that supply the giants, notes François Cormier-Bouligeon, the local member of parliament, who calls the expansion gigantesque.In most respects this is welcome. The new jobs will be skilled and well paid. Bourges has already benefited from new orders at the firms, thanks to an increase in the seven-yearly defence budget that began under President Emmanuel Macron in 2019. Unemployment fell from 10.3% in 2015 to 6.7% in the third quarter of 2024, below the national average.But it brings challenges. One is planning services—crèches, schools, housing, doctors—for the newcomers. Mr Galut has written to mayors of 54 other French defence-dependent towns to co-ordinate a bid for extra state help. To lure tourists he has won for Bourges, with its Gothic cathedral, the designation “European capital of culture” in 2028. Another issue is skills. Locals need the right training programmes and apprenticeships. Already business chiefs report recruitment difficulties. Some residents fear rising property prices.Such concerns chime with those in Unterlüss, a leafy German town near Hanover surrounded by the Lüsswald forest. The regular banging sound of test shots is the soundtrack to life at the biggest production site of Germany’s defence giant, Rheinmetall. Heavy lorries thunder through the town; commuter traffic to the firm jams the roads at rush hour. Rheinmetall will soon employ almost as many staff at its expanded plant—about 3,500—as there are inhabitants of Unterlüss. As in Bourges, this is both burden and blessing.Rheinmetall’s ambitious expansion plan includes a new ammunition factory in the town, to add to those already making self-propelled howitzers as well as the Lynx and the Puma, two types of armoured vehicle. The ceremonial opening last year was attended by Olaf Scholz, then German chancellor, and Boris Pistorius, the defence minister. Ever since, the bangs and the traffic have intensified. Dozens of fork-lift trucks zip around the site. “We are building our new plant at Rheinmetall speed,” says Jan-Phillipp Weisswange, a spokesman for the firm, implying a contrast with the sluggish pace of most German construction elsewhere.The firm is recruiting hundreds of skilled and other workers at good wages. Katharina Ebeling, the Christian Democratic mayor of Unterlüss, is investing €1.3m this year to renovate the train station and make other improvements to help the town cope. Even so, many locals seem unhappy. At the recent federal elections 35.7% voted for the far-right Alternative for Germany (AfD), well above the national average of 20.8%. The town has few shops, cafés or churches. Rheinmetall’s staff tend to commute from nearby places. So locals suffer from the noise and pollution without the direct benefits. As in Bourges, sub-contractors complain that the defence giant may poach their skilled workers.In neighbouring Poland the challenges are rather different. The country is ramping up defence spending to 4.7% of GDP this year. But it buys much of its kit from abroad. Wladyslaw Kosiniak-Kamysz, the defence minister, says he wants half the orders for combat equipment to be produced in Poland. The difficulty is that the state-owned Polish Armaments Group (PGZ), a conglomerate of 50 firms, has crowded out most private ones but is unfit even to supply the Polish army with essentials.To try to boost the conglomerate, the government last year ordered 96 howitzers from a PGZ company. In March it signed a deal for 111 Borsuks, the first military vehicles to be fully developed in Poland. For the south-eastern city of Stalowa Wola, where the Borsuk is manufactured, this could be transformational. Founded 80 years ago, when a woodland was cleared and a metal works erected, Stalowa Wola (“Steel Will”) is welded to the state of its industries, says Lucjusz Nadberezny, the mayor. After mass lay-offs in the 1990s, the district’s industrial base was revived by foreign investment in auto-part factories. The public finances of the city, in one of Poland’s poorest regions, remain strained. But with more defence-related orders the city’s steelworks plans to expand its warehouses and triple its production capabilities by 2026, which should provide a boost.Dealing with a “defence dividend” is a nice problem for European towns to have. If defence spending continues to rise at current rates, the European Commission forecasts this will boost GDP in the EU by 0.5% by 2028. For the towns themselves, often in rust belts, this will need to be managed in a way that brings local benefits. If not, disappointment could end up strengthening the political extremes. ■Stay on top of our defence and international security coverage with The War Room, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.