Europe - Five opposition-backed referendums fail in Italy

Giorgia Meloni walks away unscathed. When Maurizio Landini arrived at the polling station in the village of San Polo D’Enza, he found it almost empty: not a promising sign. Mr Landini, who heads Italy’s biggest trade union federation, was the leading sponsor of four referendums held on June 8th and 9th dealing with job security and workplace safety. A fifth proposition offered voters a chance to give immigrants easier access to Italian citizenship. But for the results to be valid, more than half the electorate had to vote. Mr Landini, other trade unionists and opposition politicians had been urging people to turn out for weeks.The referendum on citizenship was arguably of direct relevance only to Italy’s 2.5m foreign residents. But the other four affected pretty much anyone with a job. Yet not even in San Polo D’Enza, once part of Italy’s Communist-friendly “red belt”, did the left make a sufficient impact. Nationally the turnout barely reached 30%. Perhaps even more awkward for the left, which had campaigned hard to improve the lot of non-citizens, the results showed that many of its own supporters did not agree with its plans for reducing the residency requirement for citizenship from ten years to five. More than a third of those who heeded the opposition’s call to cast their ballots used them to vote no on that measure. As elsewhere in Europe, nativist feeling in Italy is not confined to the right.The outcome was all the more disappointing for opponents of Giorgia Meloni’s conservative governing coalition because until then they had seemed to be on a roll. In local elections last month a candidate backed by the centre-left Democratic Party (PD) and the more radical Five Star Movement ousted a conservative mayor in Genoa, the biggest city up for grabs. Elly Schlein, the PD’s leader, tried to look on the bright side. More people had turned out than had voted for the right at the last general election in 2022, she said. True enough. But far higher numbers have been lured to the polls by other issues in previous ballots. More than 27m, or 57% of the electorate, turned out in 2011 to block water privatisation, compared with 14m for this week’s referendums.The sponsors also claimed the government had made full use of the black arts at its disposal. Some ministers openly called for a boycott, which the opposition said was anti-democratic. Ms Meloni herself showed up at a polling station, but did not vote. Her government has established an iron grip over RAI, the state-run broadcaster. And one of the parties in her coalition, Forza Italia, was founded by the late Silvio Berlusconi, whose family also controls Mediaset, the other dominant presence in terrestrial TV. Opposition politicians said the government contrived to minimise coverage of their campaign. And they were not alone. Italy’s communications watchdog last month lodged a complaint against RAI and other broadcasters, citing a lack of adequate reporting and debate. But while TV remains the primary source of news for almost half of Italians, it does not have the influence it once enjoyed. The referendum also showed that the left is not very good at using social media.The left’s best hope of unseating Ms Meloni before an election, which need not be called until December 2027, remains an implosion of her often fractious coalition. The pressure from NATO to increase defence spending could rip open an already visible rift between Ms Meloni’s Brothers of Italy party and the League, the other main party in her government and the one most sympathetic to Russia. The problem for the opposition is that a similar breach divides the PD from the pacifist-inclined Five Stars. Ms Meloni’s critics should be careful what they wish for. ■To stay on top of the biggest European stories, sign up to Café Europa, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.