Middle East & Africa - A surprising power shift inside Hamas

Its remaining hard men inside Gaza are losing their grip. THE NARROW tunnel still reeked of decomposing bodies. A section was blocked by rubble created by two Israeli air strikes on May 13th. Israeli troops opened the tunnel only when they reached the spot, at the entrance to the European Hospital in Khan Younis, in southern Gaza, nearly four weeks later. Five bodies were found in an underground room beneath the emergency ward of the main hospital in Gaza’s second-largest city. On June 8th one was identified as that of Muhammad Sinwar, the military chief of Hamas.The confirmation of Mr Sinwar’s death changes little in and of itself. Hamas has already appointed a replacement and it has weathered the killings of many of its bosses. But it could shift the balance within the movement’s leadership, formerly dominated by Gazans, just as Israel once again increases pressure on the coastal strip.The Israel Defence Forces (IDF) opened the tunnel to journalists that same day, the first time international news organisations had been let into Gaza for five months. This controlled media visit (no foreign journalists have been allowed into Gaza independently since the war began in October 2023) had two purposes. The first was propaganda. The IDF was anxious to show it had left the hospital building intact (though all patients and staff had been evicted), despite Hamas using it as cover. This was undermined by devastation in and around Khan Younis, a city formerly of more than 200,000 residents who have been forced to evacuate to a grim “humanitarian zone” near the coast.The second was psychological warfare. Israel hopes to prove to the surviving Hamas leaders that they are running out of places to hide. One military official suggested the confirmation of Sinwar’s death could lead to Hamas accepting Israel’s terms for a ceasefire.That ceasefire, brokered by America and Qatar along with Egypt, has been on the table in various forms for months. It would start with a 60-day truce during which about half of the remaining Israeli hostages would be released in return for hundreds of Palestinian prisoners. During this period, Israeli forces would pull back from parts of Gaza and allow more aid in during talks towards a long-term truce.This last point remains the main obstacle to a deal. Hamas demands guarantees for a permanent peace that Israel has refused to give. But in recent days, Hamas has indicated it is open to discussing new terms. The entry into the strip of limited aid through distribution networks over which it has little control may worry it. The relentless destruction of Gaza by Israel’s army may, too. The new de facto Hamas leader in Gaza is Izz al-Din al-Haddad, the last of the veteran Hamas chiefs in the strip. He was tasked with concealing and securing many of the Israeli hostages seized on October 7th and is still believed to oversee their fate. His new role, however—co-ordinating with Hamas leaders outside Gaza—is his first brush with the broader politics of the movement. “Al-Haddad will have to decide now if he wants to be remembered as the man on whose watch Gaza was finally destroyed,” says an Israeli intelligence analyst. “He may prefer to be the last man standing after a ceasefire.”Under the Sinwar brothers, the Gazan branch of Hamas dominated. With them dead, the leaders outside the strip—in Doha, Beirut and Istanbul—have the upper hand once again. The movement is run by four men: Khaled Meshal, a former head of Hamas and longtime advocate of closer ties with moderate Sunni regimes instead of Iran; Zaher Jabarin, who represents Hamas’s West Bank branch and is in charge of the movement’s finances; Muhammad Darwish, a Lebanese-born Palestinian; and Khalil al-Hayya.A former deputy of Yahya Sinwar, Mr Hayya is the sole Gazan and considered the hardliner in the quartet. Even he is now in Qatar, where his hosts are pressuring him to accept a deal. The other three are expected to support a deal relinquishing Hamas’s post-war role in Gaza but preserving its standing in the Arab world. This could make it easier to reach a ceasefire.So might political changes in Israel. The far-right parties in Binyamin Netanyahu’s coalition which harbour ambitions of occupying and resettling Gaza have threatened to bring down the government if he ends the war. Increasing pressure from Donald Trump and other Western allies partly explains the shift. On June 10th a number, including Britain, announced personal sanctions on Itamar Ben-Gvir and Bezalel Smotrich, both far-right ministers. So does a growing expectation that Hamas will accept Israel’s conditions. That same day Mr Netanyahu said there had been “significant progress” towards a deal.Add to that the weakening leverage of Mr Netanyahu’s far-right allies as elections draw nearer. The polls are scheduled for October 2026. But tensions over demands by the ultra-Orthodox parties for a law exempting religious students from military service could lead to a vote much sooner. Mr Netanyahu is wary of an election that he is likely to lose. But if he cannot prevent one, he may prefer to hold it after securing a ceasefire that led to the release of the remaining hostages, which he could frame as a victory. A deal would also ease American pressure; Mr Netanyahu has no desire to go to the polls when he seems to be out of favour in Washington. Steve Witkoff, Mr Trump’s Middle East envoy, is expected to return to the region in the coming days. He may arrive with a little more hope. ■Sign up to the Middle East Dispatch, a weekly newsletter that keeps you in the loop on a fascinating, complex and consequential part of the world.