Europe - Picasso’s home town is thriving

But will Málaga fall victim to its own success?. ON A RAINY weekday in early spring Málaga is thronged with tourists, clambering over the Moorish castle that overlooks the port, carousing at the pavement bars or queuing for one of half-a-dozen art museums. It wasn’t always thus. Until the turn of the century tourists heading for the resorts of the Costa del Sol shunned what was then a drab former industrial town. Today Málaga, Spain’s sixth city, is booming, powered not just by tourism but also by a burgeoning tech industry. Its economy has outpaced the rest of the Andalucía region for most of the past decade. It is held up by some as a model for other Spanish cities, but some locals fear it may fall victim to its own success.Its revival began with the pedestrianisation of the centre and the opening in 2003 of a museum dedicated to Pablo Picasso, who was born in the city. Three others followed, including an outpost of Paris’s Pompidou Centre. Though cultural tourism accounts for only a minority of the 14.4m visitors last year to Málaga province (which includes Marbella and other resorts), the museums have helped turn the city into a magnet for tech workers and others. Antonio Banderas, an actor, has returned to his native city to open a theatre.In a nearby valley sprawl the anonymous buildings of the Technological Park of Andalucía. Founded in 1992 as a joint venture between the city and regional governments and a local bank, it now employs 28,000 workers and houses companies ranging from Accenture and Ericsson to startups. Google and Vodafone have operations in the city. The park is still expanding: it now focuses on cybersecurity, games and microelectronics.Málaga has natural advantages, says Francisco de la Torre, its mayor. They start with a benign climate and its site on the Mediterranean. It has Spain’s fourth-biggest airport. But it also has good vocational-training centres and a steady, consensual leadership: Mr de la Torre, who is 82, has been mayor since 2000.Two clouds have darkened the horizon. Like many other Spanish cities, Málaga is short of housing. Some 9,000 new homes are under way, with the city providing the land for private builders. The other worry is the excesses of mass tourism. The historic centre has around 6,000 tourist flats, the highest density in Spain. Carlos Carrera of the local residents’ association complains of “strangers entering buildings, fights, drunks and hooligans in the lift” and of bars that stay open till 2am. “The balance has been upset,” he says. Mr de la Torre replies that the city has banned new tourist flats and is closing those without permits. The overall number is falling, he says.These are the problems of success. “It was a city in black and white and now it’s in colour,” argues José María Luna, the city’s culture boss from 2011 to 2024. “Málaga has found a place in the world.” ■To stay on top of the biggest European stories, sign up to Café Europa, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.