Britain - Might the Royal Air Force go nuclear again?

The defence review suggests that Britain could soon wield tactical nuclear bombs. THE RUMOUR among locals in the 1960s was that the base was a secret centre for breeding chimpanzees for Britain’s space programme. There was no such space programme. And there were certainly no chimpanzees. The heavily defended buildings at RAF Barnham in Norfolk were home to the nuclear bombs carried by British planes. Nuclear convoys of cargo trucks were routine. In one town’s high street, recalls an officer, the drivers “discovered that, by blipping their throttles at the right moment they could lift the mini-skirts of the girls on the pavement alongside them”.For most of the cold war and long after it, the Royal Air Force (RAF) possessed tactical nuclear weapons—smaller bombs with lower explosive yield, which were expected to be used prior to any full-scale nuclear exchange. The last of these WE.177 bombs were dismantled in August 1998. After a 27-year lull, a new defence review published on June 2nd might have put the RAF, and the country, back onto the path of tactical nuclear weapons.The review calls for the RAF to consider buying land-based F-35A fighter jets to complement the current fleet of F-35Bs, which fly from Britain’s two aircraft-carriers. The B, which can take off and land vertically, is more versatile, but the A is cheaper and has longer range. More importantly, the A is also certified by America to carry B61 tactical nuclear gravity bombs.America deploys around 100 of those bombs at six bases in five European countries (see map). They remain under American authority, but European air forces practise carrying and dropping them. The aim is to ensure that NATO could respond to limited nuclear use by Russia—say, a nuclear strike on an air base—without initiating a full-scale nuclear war, while also giving European allies a stake in that process.The review recommends that Britain open talks with America and NATO on the “potential benefits and feasibility of enhanced UK participation in NATO’s nuclear mission”. That does not mean Britain will join. On June 11th George Robertson, the lead reviewer, told Parliament that he was “not terribly enthusiastic” about the idea. But the Ministry of Defence has explored it in detail over the past year. Moreover, over the last several years, America has upgraded RAF Lakenheath in Suffolk to allow the base to accommodate b61s.Re-nuclearising the raf would provoke a lively debate. Britain’s F-35 fleet is relatively small. Allocating one or two squadrons to a nuclear role would absorb training time and could leave fewer jets for other tasks, like attacking Russian air defences. Then there is the question of whether Britain would add value to the mission, given that the Belgian, German, Italian and Dutch air forces would be carrying B61s anyway.Proponents retort that the NATO-Russia nuclear balance is unstable. Russia is thought to have between 1,000 and 2,000 deployed tactical nuclear weapons, an order of magnitude more than NATO. William Alberque, who previously led NATO’s arms-control centre, notes that NATO’s top commanders and officials agree that the alliance needs “far more” nuclear-capable aircraft, at higher readiness, in part because the current fleet is concentrated at too few bases.The other advantage, says Vipin Narang, until recently one of the Pentagon’s top nuclear officials, is that Britain is “avowedly the second nuclear power in NATO” after America. France has nukes at sea and—unlike Britain—on jets, but it does not take part in the alliance’s joint nuclear planning. Britain’s nuclear status means it might be more confident than Belgium or Italy that it could use tactical nukes in a crisis while also deterring a larger nuclear response against British soil. Re-nuclearising the RAF “is the single greatest augmentation in NATO nuclear deterrence possible at the moment”, argues Mr Narang: “the quickest, cheapest, most valuable, best deterrent bang-for-buck”.Critics point out two problems. One is that the B61 is a gravity bomb. Planes have to get virtually above their target to drop it. That is becoming ever harder, as the defence review acknowledges elsewhere. The second issue is that America would have a veto on the use of B61s. Some nuclear enthusiasts suggest that Britain could solve both problems by building its own nuclear-armed cruise missile, which could be fired from “stand-off” range. An official review of nuclear policy published in 2013 concluded that it could take 24 years for Britain to build a new warhead for a cruise missile—and that it might cost £8bn-10bn.Britain’s nuclear infrastructure is in poor shape. The Atomic Weapons Establishment (AWE) at Aldermaston is busy developing new warheads for Trident missiles. “AWE would find it very difficult if not impossible to contemplate another warhead,” concluded a study last year by Nick Ritchie and John Walker of the University of York. One option would be co-operating with France. A snag, notes Héloïse Fayet of IFRI, a think-tank, is that France’s work on ASN4G, its post-2035 nuclear missile, “might now be too advanced to transform it into a joint project”.Hosting American bombs would “get the RAF thinking about the processes, procedures, capability, operational stuff that they’ll have to get their heads around for any sovereign capability down the track”, says Wyn Bowen of King’s College London. Mr Narang agrees that the B61 could be “a major deterrent boost on its own”. But he acknowledges it could also be more than that: “a potential gateway drug to a future sovereign capability.” ■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in Britain, sign up to Blighty, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.