Britain - A new sort of unrest rattles Northern Ireland

A rapidly diversifying population helps explain an outburst of anti-foreigner violence. Northern Ireland is used to rioting. But it is not used to the sort which has enveloped parts of Ballymena this week. This disorder has not involved unionists or nationalists clashing over tribal disputes such as parades by the Protestant Orange Order through Catholic areas. There was another target: foreigners.On June 7th a teenage girl told police she had been sexually assaulted in the County Antrim town 37km north of Belfast. The police soon arrested two 14-year-old Romanian boys, who were charged with attempted rape and appeared in court on June 9th. They deny the charges; any trial will be months away.That night there was a protest in support of the girl’s family. It was rapidly overtaken by thuggery. Migrants’ homes were attacked; several were torched. Firefighters in breathing apparatus desperately kicked in doors and searched burning buildings for anyone trapped. A young woman and child were treated for smoke inhalation.The family of the girl the rioters claimed to be supporting said in a statement that they opposed the violence. But the trouble restarted. Over five hours on June 10th masked men used fireworks, masonry and petrol bombs as weapons. The Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI) deployed riot police, dogs and water cannon, and fired plastic bullets. Less serious trouble spread to parts of Belfast. Over the first two nights 32 police officers were injured. A PSNI assistant chief constable, Ryan Henderson, described the disorder as “racist thuggery”. The prime minister, Sir Keir Starmer, who worked with the PSNI as a lawyer before entering politics, condemned the “mindless attacks”.Several residents marked their doors with their nationality in the hope of avoiding attacks. Some foreigners also displayed Union flags, hoping to demonstrate loyalty to Britain in what is a strongly pro-British area. Six people were arrested, and more arrests will follow. Northern Ireland’s police have decades of experience policing riots. Their strategy involves soaking up the violence, which they film, later using that footage to catch culprits.The town’s MP, Jim Allister, is one of Northern Ireland’s most prominent politicians, and one of its most hardline. His party has a formal link with Nigel Farage’s Reform UK. Mr Allister emphasised that the “senseless violence” was wrong and urged those involved to stop. But he also said that there are too many migrants in Ballymena. He said the last time he canvassed a street of 50 houses there were “five local, if I can call them that, residents of Ballymena”.Hours after the violence began, Mr Allister was in London promoting Ballymena’s most successful company, Wrightbus, a pioneering builder of electric and hydrogen buses. Several of those attacked work for Wrightbus. One of them, Kevin Rous, a Filipino, saw his family’s home destroyed. “I am very humble and polite and very friendly,” he said. “What are my faults?”Though the alleged sexual assault was the catalyst, behind the unrest lies Northern Ireland’s rapidly diversifying population. During three decades of the Troubles in which 3,600 people were killed, few outsiders dreamed of settling in Northern Ireland. After peace followed the 1998 Good Friday Agreement, that started to change. Northern Ireland remains the least ethnically diverse part of the British Isles. Yet changes that happened more gradually in other parts of the country are happening more suddenly in the province. In two Ballymena primary schools more than half of pupils are children of migrants.For those trying to persuade tourists to visit Northern Ireland, the timing is disastrous. Next month the Open golf tournament will be hosted in Portrush, a seaside town on the picturesque north coast. Not all potential tourists will take time to work out that Ballymena is 50km south and a very different place.Some of those seeking to expel foreigners are themselves the descendants of migrants. Ballymena was settled by the Vikings, Anglo-Normans, English and Scots. But try explaining that to someone holding a petrol bomb. ■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in Britain, sign up to Blighty, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.