Britain - The English have become wine producers as well as wine consumers

English wine is changing the landscape. Beyond its famous orchards, jams, and reality-TV series, Essex is steadily cultivating a reputation for grapes that yield quality wine. In the last two decades over 400 hectares of vines have been planted in the Crouch Valley. Clay soil, south-facing slopes and low rainfall help grape ripeness, while proximity to a tidal river offers protection from spring frosts. “We get a lot of sunshine,” says Emily Wilsdon of Creeksea Vineyard. She has planted 30 hectares of vines since 2021 in partnership with McNeill Vineyard Management, which oversees the vineyard. When Ms Wilsdon and her husband Harry bought the farm in 2008 it was derelict. Today it grows grape varieties used for making still wine, including Pinot Noir and Sauvignon Blanc. Wine has brought a “new identity” for the Crouch Valley, says Ms Wilsdon.The English have long been big consumers of wine. Britain is the world’s second-largest wine importer by value and volume. Wine is becoming part of the national landscape, too. Viticulture is Britain’s fastest-growing agricultural sector.Vines are sprouting up across the English countryside. With rising temperatures and favourable soil, vineyard acreage has expanded more than four-fold since 2000: over 1,000 vineyards covered more than 4,000 hectares in 2023 across Kent, Sussex, Hampshire and beyond. Landowners are scrambling to convert farms into vineyards. Esteemed champagne houses such as Taittinger and Vranken-Pommery Monopole are investing in English soil.Chapel Down, whose first vines were planted in 1977, is Britain’s largest wine producer. It has more than 400 hectares in Tenterden, Kent—a tenth of Britain’s total. Its fizz was the beverage of choice at the royal wedding in 2011, and is offered to winning teams on the podiums of English cricket and the Boat Race. When restaurants and pubs shut down in 2020, cash-rich households eager to champion local wineries drove up sales across the industry. “Sales exploded,” recalls Henry Laithwaite, who founded Harrow & Hope, a winemaker in Marlow, with his wife Kaye. “We just could not keep up.” Climate change has made grape-growing more viable, but it brings extreme-weather events and increased uncertainty, too, according to Mr Laithwaite, who has dozens of barrels stored away to hedge against bad harvests. Heavy rainfall or freak frost can lead to erratic yields, making it tougher to produce a steady supply. “It’s getting warmer,” he says. “But it isn’t getting any more predictable.”Output in the past two years reflects that. In 2023 wine made on English shores increased by 77% over 2022, to a record 21.6m bottles (most of it sparkling wine) after a bumper harvest. But a poorer harvest in 2024 yielded only 6m-7m bottles. It was the worst year since 2012. In global terms English wine is still a drop in the barrel—less than 0.1% of world output. France, Italy and other powerhouses each produce billions of bottles a year. The average English vineyard is relatively small, making it hard to compete on price in the mass market.As a result, English wine is often positioned as a premium product. High price-points deter some consumers, while others opt for pricier but more recognisable brands. At an average cost of £32 ($43) for a bottle, English sparkling wine is pricier than prosecco (£13) and cava (£11), but cheaper than champagne (£51). A preference among Britons for budget-friendly imports sits alongside consumption of expensive champagne. The challenge for English wineries is finding a niche.They are focusing on quality. “This is a race to the top, not the bottom,” says James Pennefather, Chapel Down’s chief executive. Millennials are a big growth driver. Despite drinking less often (a trend identified across the globe), they spend more on quality products. Ethical considerations, and an appetite for supporting British brands, are a major draw. Chapel Down’s 1.5m vines are pruned by hand. “It’s a gargantuan task,” says Josh Donaghay-Spire, Chapel Down’s head winemaker, but it is one that has paid off. Last year, Chapel Down won 41 different awards for quality.A stunt in 2023 in Reims, the French capital of champagne, illustrates how it can compete with big brands for taste. Under the guise of “Chapelle en Bas”, Chapel Down offered unsuspecting locals and tourists samples of its own sparkling wine alongside an unmarked Moët & Chandon Impérial Brut. Nearly two-thirds preferred the English variety.Shifting consumer preferences help. Sparkling wine, the bulk of English output, was once about celebrations and grand milestones. Today younger people pair it with more casual gatherings.Britain’s vineyards are fast becoming tourist destinations, drawing 1.5m visitors in 2023, an increase of 55% over the previous year. Wine is also altering the rural scenery, bringing new jobs and income streams for communities, according to Mr Donaghay-Spire. “Wine has long been a part of the culture in England, but the production of it hasn’t,” he says. That is now visibly changing.■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in Britain, sign up to Blighty, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.