Business - The world’s biggest food company plans to beef up in America

JBS, Brazil’s meat-packing giant, wants to expand. Will its critics let it?. Consumers outside Brazil may not be familiar with JBS, even though many will have tasted its products. But as the meat-packing colossus prepared to list on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) on June 13th, its American competitors were quivering in their cowboy boots. The listing is designed to allow JBS, already the world’s biggest food company by revenue, to gobble up even more market share by tapping cheaper capital and attracting new investors. Yet it could also leave the firm vulnerable to litigation from its broad range of enemies, who include environmentalists as well as an unusual coalition of Republicans and Democrats.JBS started in 1953 as a small slaughterhouse deep in Brazil’s interior, run by José Batista Sobrinho. Soon after, Brazil began building its modernist capital, Brasília, nearby and Mr Batista supplied the construction workers with fresh beef. All the while he instructed his three sons on how to skin a carcass, salt the hide, prepare cuts and deliver the goods.Despite not completing secondary school, two of the sons, Joesley and Wesley, showed a knack for business. When they took over the family firm in the early 2000s they expanded into poultry, pork, fish, eggs and plant-based meat, through a multi-billion-dollar acquisition spree financed partly by Brazil’s national development bank. Last year the firm generated $78bn in revenue, more than any rival makes from food sales (see chart). These days around half its sales are in America.On São Paulo’s stock exchange, JBS’s shares have long traded at a discount to those of its US-listed rivals. The firm hopes that listing in New York will give it access to the deep pockets of America’s institutional investors, as well as the chance to join market indices like the S&P 500, where it would stand to attract capital from passive funds. More and cheaper capital could help JBS expand into new markets in Asia and Africa, where it is betting on a growing appetite for protein. It also has its eye on new lines of business, such as finished meat products. Since JBS announced its plan to list in America in 2023, its shares have almost doubled in value.Yet some are finding the listing hard to swallow. JBS has opened a corporate entity in the Netherlands to issue two types of share, one with ten times more voting power than the other. This could give the Batista brothers almost 85% of voting shares, up from 48% (JBS says that any conclusions on voting power at this stage are premature). Such dual-class listings are popular among tech startups because they give their founders more control. Yet critics argue that JBS is not a fledgling company and that concentrating voting rights in the hands of the Batistas could undermine corporate governance. America’s leading advisory firms for institutional investors recommended that shareholders reject the listing, but it was narrowly approved.JBS counters that investors who owned stock before the listing will be able to convert their shares into the type with greater voting power, though these cannot be traded publicly. It points out that its main American rival, Tyson Foods, has a similar voting structure. “Our sector is very difficult—you need people who understand the business,” says Guilherme Cavalcanti, JBS’s chief financial officer. He says the Batistas’ long experience in the meat industry gives them a better understanding of the company’s needs than shareholders who sometimes prioritise short-term profits.Others believe that greater control by the brothers may prove a liability. Both were briefly jailed in Brazil in 2017, but later acquitted. The same year JBS’s holding company, J&F, signed a plea deal with Brazilian prosecutors and agreed to pay a fine of $2bn over 25 years for bribing officials to secure tax breaks and cheap loans for their companies. (A judge on Brazil’s supreme court suspended the fine in 2023, arguing that the plea deal may have been signed involuntarily.) In 2020 J&F agreed to pay another fine, of over $250m, in a plea deal with America’s Department of Justice, for using American bank accounts to pay bribes to Brazilian officials. The firm paid a $27m fine for engaging in bribery to acquire Pilgrim’s Pride, an American poultry company, in 2009. In 2021 Pilgrim’s Pride pleaded guilty to fixing prices for broiler chickens and was fined more than $100m.Because of this unsavoury history, JBS’s listing plans have provoked an unusual show of bipartisanship in Washington. Last year a group of American congressmen including Marco Rubio, now the secretary of state, urged competition regulators to consider how JBS’s listing could “enhance its ability to engage in anti-competitive conduct and adversely impact US farmers and ranchers”. A $5m contribution by Pilgrim’s Pride to Donald Trump’s inauguration committee—the largest of any donor—has irked Democrats. (The company says it has a “long bipartisan history of participating in the civic process”.)JBS has also been a target of human-rights and environmental charities, which say the company has dragged its feet when tackling illegal deforestation in its supply chain. Mighty Earth, an organisation based in Washington, DC, says that several farms which directly supplied thousands of cattle to JBS slaughterhouses were linked to alleged illegal deforestation in the Amazon in 2018-24. The charity says illegal deforestation is still more common on farms that indirectly supply slaughterhouses. On June 8th it sent a legal notice to the NYSE warning that JBS’s listing could violate anti-money-laundering laws if its profits can be linked to illegal deforestation.JBS says that Mighty Earth’s allegations are unfounded, and that it is doing more than most meatpackers to tackle deforestation. From January its direct suppliers will be obliged to provide information on the farms they buy cattle from. In Pará, a state in the Amazon with 26m head of cattle, JBS is helping to fund ear-tags for cows to improve tracking. Pará hopes to have all cows tagged by the end of next year; only 12,000 have been so far.JBS’s many critics are encouraged that the firm has a corporate presence in the Netherlands, which has emerged as a favoured destination for climate litigation. Alex Wijeratna of Mighty Earth reckons that JBS will be hit with lawsuits from environmental campaigners “as soon as they land in Holland”. Something for investors to chew over.■