Britain - For once, London is short-changed by the government

Cash for everywhere outside the M25. During a parliamentary debate in April, politicians from northern England complained about the lack of public investment in their patches. “The north has been short-changed,” argued Emma Foody, mp for Cramlington and Killingworth in the north-east. “We are given the cast-offs,” added Sarah Russell, the mp for Congleton in the north-west.The government heeds such gripes, partly because the north is politically competitive. Labour sagged there in the 2019 general election, then surged in 2024. London, the part of Britain that is usually accused of grabbing more investment than it deserves, merely went from solidly Labour to more solidly Labour. On June 11th the chancellor, Rachel Reeves, revealed what she would do.Declaring that past governments had invested too little outside south-east England, she announced money for big things elsewhere, such as an upgrade to the railway between Leeds and Manchester, and small things, like Southport’s pier and Kirkcaldy’s seafront and high street. A new local growth fund will go to all regions and nations outside the south. Up to 350 deprived places will receive cash—an echo of the Conservatives’ “levelling up” project.When the chancellor’s spending review mentioned London, it was often in the context of promises to close government offices and move civil servants out. The capital had two big requests, for money to extend the Docklands Light Railway and the Bakerloo Underground line. Both got short shrift. The contrast with Birmingham and Greater Manchester, which will be able to extend their tram networks, is plain.The Treasury also promised to amend its Green Book, a guide to evaluating public projects. That document has a powerful reputation in Britain, despite being little read. In the north of England it is often said to block investment there. “The perception is that Liverpool or Sheffield or Leeds didn’t get funding because of the Green Book,” says Rebecca Riley of Birmingham Business School, one of the few who has read it.A review of the Green Book, published on the same day as the spending review, rubbished a few myths. There is no good evidence that it favours some parts of the country over others, the Treasury declared. A common claim, that the Green Book smiles on transport projects in London and south-east England because their residents are paid more, so projects that promise to cut their commuting times look better in cost-benefit analyses, is not true.The Green Book will change anyway. The Treasury will solicit what it calls “place-based business cases”, which should allow regions to argue that a cluster of projects (say, a new public-transport route, new housing and a skills programme) will bring benefits greater than the sum of the individual projects. That might help poor places in particular, since they rarely have just one big problem. The Treasury will also publish successful business cases, which should help those that are less expert at preparing them.It was Londoners’ turn to complain—with reason. True, in the 2023-24 financial year, the city accounted for 31% of public capital spending on transport in England. But London relies on public transport far more than anywhere else: more than half of all English bus journeys occur there. And, as John Dickie of BusinessLDN, an advocacy group, points out, more transport can mean more of the housing that the government is so keen to deliver. Transport for London had argued that if the Docklands Light Railway were extended, up to 30,000 homes could be built.Above all, the chancellor did little to lessen the Treasury’s grip over public spending. For a country of its size, Britain is exceedingly fiscally centralised: about 95% of tax is raised by central government. The great cities of England are little more than courtiers, trying to catch the eye of Ms Reeves and her officials. They had hoped that the chancellor might allow them to levy a tax on hotel stays, as cities in other countries (including Scotland) can. The response was silence.■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in Britain, sign up to Blighty, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.