Britain - Inverted commas are falling out of fashion 

Blame James Joyce. And “fashion”. They are inaudible and unpronounceable. They do not exist in spoken English—they are at best a pause rather than a presence: no one (with apologies to those listening to this article in our audio edition) could describe the sound of “”. Yet their increasing absence is causing conniptions.Open Sally Rooney’s new novel “Intermezzo” and, on the first page, a character says: “Hello, Peter.” Except, as this is a novel by Ms Rooney, she does not say: “Hello, Peter.” She says: Hello, Peter. With no inverted commas. Peter then asks, “May I come in?” Except, again, he does not. Instead he asks, May I come in?The inverted comma is falling out of fashion. Ms Rooney discarded it for her last three bestselling books. This year’s Booker Prize winner, “Orbital”, didn’t use them either. Our number-crunching reveals a dramatic decline: in the 1970s, 94% of Booker-nominated novels used them, compared with just 72% in the past decade. They are sighted less and slighted more: novelists have called them “weird” and an “obstruction”. In certain sorts of fiction the inverted comma is, says Robert Douglas-Fairhurst, a professor of English at the University of Oxford, “gradually being removed”.Quite why is not clear. Most blame James Joyce, a glum Irish writer. Joyce called the inverted commas “perverted commas” and dropped them for his 1922 novel “Ulysses”. Inverted commas started to be seen as a colonial, even patriarchal, imposition on a piece of text. Instead, to indicate speech, writers like Joyce adopted the indentation and em-dash of the French (evidently more artistically appealing imperialists). To this day the commas’ absence is associated with edginess and Irishness.Language changes. Open an old book and it will be littered with an antique ink-splatter of marks—the ¶, the §—that are mostly meaningless to modern eyes. What is surprising is the emotion all this engenders. Oxford commas invite outrage; semicolons invoke scorn; one 2003 grammar book suggested that a misplaced apostrophe should trigger emotions “similar to the stages of bereavement”. Naturally it was a bestseller.Partly this is pure snobbery: punctuation is not merely a semantic marker but a social one. Largely inaudible and completely invisible in everyday speech, its correct usage can be acquired only through years of (often expensive) education. Punctuation thus marks not just texts but people. Those who know, or think they know, whether a full stop should go inside or outside inverted commas join an elite intellectual aristocracy. Though it is best not to brag about it: the line between stupidity and pretension is fine. “Do not use semicolons,” warned Kurt Vonnegut. “All they do is show you’ve been to college.”But partly people also get cross because punctuation is genuinely helpful. Writers often forget that reading is hard, says Adam Mars-Jones, a novelist. If a piece of writing has not had “every single screw tightened”—every word well-chosen, every piece of punctuation in place—the reader can struggle. Inverted commas help as they envelop a quotation in a crisp clasp of reassuring accuracy, or add obvious snark.Their absence, by contrast, casts a post-modern pall of uncertainty over the words. Were these really the words spoken, you wonder? That is partly the point. If a novel is “written in the first person”, Ms Rooney has said, “isn’t it all a quotation?” She does not “see any need for them”. Or as one should perhaps now write, does not see any need for them. ■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in Britain, sign up to Blighty, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.