Finance & economics - America and China have spooked each other

With the costs of the trade war abundantly clear, officials seek to restore their truce. Officials from America and China met for the latest round of trade talks on June 9th-10th in Lancaster House, a mansion near Buckingham Palace. The building was commissioned in 1825 by the “Grand Old” Duke of York, whose military manoeuvres have been immortalised in a children’s song. A fitting venue, then, for a trade war of escalations and climbdowns.The aim of the talks in London was narrow. America hoped to restore the truce it thought it had secured a month ago in Geneva. In particular, it wanted China to export more rare-earth metals, and the magnets that contain them. On June 11th both Howard Lutnick, America’s commerce secretary, and President Donald Trump announced China had agreed to do just that. However, even if peace is truly restored, things will not be quite the same. To invoke a Chinese expression, not all the water spilled can be returned to the pot.China’s officials will have gained new confidence in their economic clout and grit. The London meeting represented the second time in two months that the world’s pre-eminent superpower had come asking for help. In Geneva the Americans needed China to cut its tariffs in tandem with theirs. In London they asked China to make good on its promise to “suspend or remove” restrictions on rare earths, alleviating a supply-chain crunch most glaring in carmaking. This asymmetry of neediness extends even to the two countries’ leaders. The London meeting followed a call between Mr Trump and his opposite number, Xi Jinping, on June 5th—their first since Mr Trump’s inauguration. It was, Mr Trump said, a “very good” call. But it was also one Mr Xi seemed in no hurry to take.This was not how America imagined the trade war. After Mr Trump unveiled sweeping tariffs on April 2nd, he said countries were “kissing my ass” to make deals. China took a different approach, matching his tariffs tit-for-tat. Its leaders showed they would take economic risks to defy Mr Trump. Although their retaliatory tariffs did not hurt America much in themselves, they provoked Mr Trump into a cycle of escalation that threatened agony for both countries. America decided it could not live with the pain, sparing China, too.Before April many economists had assumed that if Mr Trump followed through on his threats, China’s exports would collapse and its currency plunge. Sales to America did indeed drop sharply in April and May, falling by 28% in the two months combined, compared with the same period of 2024. But exports have risen by 6% overall, owing to increased shipments to Europe and South-East Asia. China’s currency, meanwhile, is stronger now against the dollar than it was before April 2nd.As well as showing Mr Trump’s limited tolerance for pain, recent events have demonstrated one of China’s most potent weapons. In April it imposed export restrictions on seven rare earths, such as terbium and dysprosium, which keep the magnets used in electric vehicles and wind turbines working at high temperatures.The interruption caused alarm. In May Ford idled a plant in Chicago that makes SUVs. The Motor & Equipment Manufacturers Association warned of broader disruption. It signed a letter highlighting that a lack of access to these inputs would hamper the production of lots of car parts.Such complaints showed that China has a chokehold over America. This was already known within industry circles, but perhaps not fully appreciated in the Oval Office. The past two months amount to a “weapons test”, showing the power of China’s instruments of economic coercion.After Geneva, the Americans may have hoped China would remove its restrictions altogether. Instead, the government began reviewing applications for licences to sell rare earths. The process was slow and opaque, overseen by an understaffed ministry buried beneath an avalanche of applications. The delays angered American officials. “Maybe it’s a glitch in the Chinese system,” said Scott Bessent, the treasury secretary, “maybe it’s intentional.”There was not much America could do to ease China’s grip: building an alternative supply chain would take at least three years and still probably fall short. Sometimes the best way to escape a chokehold is to establish one of your own. America pursued several options. Officials warned companies making chip-design software not to sell to China. They said they would revoke the visas of Chinese students. They stopped the sale of inputs essential to China’s homegrown passenger jet. They even threatened to subpoena the country’s banks, Mr Lutnick said in an interview with CNBC, a TV channel. These measures will be taken off, he said, if China approves more rare-earth exports.Neither America nor China is in a position to rout its economic adversary. Each remains dependent on the other, albeit in different ways. That reality, always clear to China, should now be obvious to both sides. Neither will prevail nor disarm. More likely they will keep mobilising and demobilising their economic arsenals to keep the other in check. It is a pattern the old Duke of York might recognise. ■Editor’s note: This story has been updated.For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in economics, finance and markets, sign up to Money Talks, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.