Finance & economics - European stocks are buoyant. Firms still refuse to list there

Another star prepares to move from London to New York. It must be tempting to give up. Those tasked with reviving Britain’s stockmarket have long faced a difficult task and a steady drip of bad news, as one firm after another departs for private ownership or America. It will still have hit like a bucket of cold water to learn, on June 5th, that Wise intends to move its main listing to New York.One of Europe’s hottest fintech outfits, Wise’s flotation in London in 2021 spurred hopes that other stars would follow. If they included Klarna and Revolut, two even hotter peers, the London Stock Exchange would add a new, buzzy cluster to its old-timers in banking, energy and mining. That would attract attention from stock analysts, capital from international investors and yet more listings. Four years on, it has not worked out. Like Wise, Klarna intends to float in America; Revolut’s boss has hinted that it may do so, too.The failure to attract and retain fast-growing firms is most often laid at the doors of the London Stock Exchange, but it is a pan-European malaise. Klarna, after all, is Swedish. So is Spotify, the only European firm founded this century worth more than $100bn. It listed in New York in 2018. New Financial, a think-tank, reckons that in the decade to 2024 some 130 companies moved their listing from Europe to America, while over 1,000 were taken private. In today’s money, their total value at the point of de-listing adds up to $1.7trn—more than 10% of what Europe’s stockmarkets are worth. Proportional to market capitalisation, Ireland is the biggest loser, followed by Sweden, Britain and Germany.Unnerved, Europe’s financial elite has responded in time-honoured fashion: it has convened task-forces, launched consultations and commissioned reviews from grandees that, if printed, would fell forests. There have been extravagant promises of streamlined reporting, harmonised regulations and centralised supervision. In what may eventually be a radical step, Britain’s government is mulling plans to force some retirement savings to be invested at home.It is, in fact, unfair to make fun of these efforts. Speak to bosses of private firms in Europe, or to their investors, and they will commend these incremental reforms to make the continent’s stockmarkets work better. A European listing, they will say, might make sense for plenty of companies. Then, without missing a beat, they will explain why theirs is not one of them and America is a better fit.Frequently, most of the company’s shareholders will be American already. “They would find it weird if I didn’t list there,” says the boss of a European startup planning its initial public offering. Listing in America means using bankers and a wider milieu with which the investors are already familiar. More importantly, if the company has global ambitions, which pretty much all those backed by venture capital do, America’s consumer market is among the most lucrative. An IPO in New York might build the brand. It does not hurt that the median boss of a firm in America’s S&P 500 share index is paid two and a half times their equivalent in Britain’s FTSE 100. The biggest and most consistent bugbear among tech founders is that nervous European investors are perennially reluctant to approve the high-risk, high-growth strategies that they want to pursue.Just as important are the factors that startup bosses do not mention. The main one is the supposed “valuation gap”, meaning the higher average multiple by which earnings are scaled up to generate share prices for firms listed in America as opposed to Europe. Perhaps sensing that harmonised regulation does not set pulses racing, proponents of Europe’s exchanges have recently switched tack, reasonably arguing that the valuation gap is a myth. Control for expected profit growth and the different markets’ sectoral mixes, and it disappears.Before Arm, a British chip designer, listed in New York in 2023, the City of London was rife with rumours that the perceived valuation gap was why the local stock exchange missed out. But the gap does not seem to be behind recent moves. Wise’s chief financial officer has said that valuation was “not really the driver” of his firm’s decision. This makes sense: at 29 times its expected earnings for the coming year, it is already more richly valued than the S&P 500 average. Meanwhile, European shares have recently been outperforming American ones. The most disheartening thing for those trying to patch up Europe’s capital markets is that the companies they must woo are simply not interested.■Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.