Business - Make America French Again

Gallic lessons for the American private sector. ON JUNE 14TH Constitution Avenue will turn into the Champs Elysées for a day. Some 150 military vehicles, 50 aircraft and 6,600 troops will roll, fly and march past the White House to celebrate the US Army’s 250th birthday (and, coincidentally, its current occupant’s 79th). The scene will be reminiscent of the annual Bastille Day parade in Paris, which so inspired Donald Trump when he attended one during his first presidential term that he has since insisted on emulating it at home.The Pentagon pantomime is not Mr Trump’s only recent French import. The Oval Office got a Versailles-style gilded makeover. And even as they turn their noses up at goods from France and the rest of the European Union, which may soon face a 50% tariff, the president and people around him are turning into avid consumers of French ideas. These include what by America’s free-market standards counts as a heavy dose of dirigisme.In recent months the Trump administration has touted not just tariffs (to protect domestic industry) but also national champions (such as the $500bn Stargate artificial-intelligence project), price controls (for pharmaceuticals) and state ownership (demanding a golden share in return for blessing a Japanese takeover of US Steel). On June 5th Steve Bannon, a prominent MAGA-whisperer, went so far as to call for the full nationalisation of SpaceX, a rocketry-and-satellite firm belonging to Elon Musk, a former “First Buddy” who had just had an epic falling-out with the president.Mr Trump himself has yet to channel his inner François Mitterrand in so far as seizing private assets is concerned. But it is becoming clear that for large sections of his right-wing movement, Making America Great Again involves the sort of protectionism and state meddling that would be more familiar to Mitterrand than to his American contemporary, Ronald Reagan.Chief executives in industries that could benefit from protection have cheered parts of this agenda. Mary Barra of General Motors has defended Mr Trump’s tariffs on cars as helping “level the playing-field” warped by other countries’ unfair rules. Leon Topalian of Nucor said those on steel, of which his firm is America’s biggest producer, were “long overdue”. Marc Bitzer of Whirlpool has described the washing-machine maker as a “net winner” from Trumpian trade policies. However, for most American CEOs it all seems about as appealing as a corked Pétrus.To understand their sniffiness, consider American business before Reagan’s free-market revolution. The 1960s seem to be the time when, in populist MAGA eyes, America was great: men were men, most women had yet to discover feminism and businesses built stuff. Manufacturing accounted for more than a fifth of total output. Effective tariffs averaged 5-10%. Unions enjoyed plenty of clout. By 1970 more than half of the net value generated by non-financial companies was paid out to workers as wages, twice the share that flowed to their employers’ bottom lines. In all these respects, America Inc and France SA were hard to tell apart.American capitalists look back at the period of Franco-American similitude with less nostalgia. Between 1960 and 1980 their companies turned profits (as measured by the gross operating surplus of non-financial firms) amounting to a ho-hum 14% of GDP. Uncle Sam pocketed around a third of that in corporation tax. Rising inflation, exacerbated by Richard Nixon’s 90-day freeze on prices and wages in 1971, pushed up short-term interest rates. The cost of capital for a typical firm soared from 7.5% or thereabouts in the 1960s to nearly 15% in the early 1980s. In the two decades to the start of 1980 the S&P 500 index of large companies rose by 80%, for a paltry compound annual return of 3%.Both in terms of profitability and stockmarket returns, the pre-Reagan era in America also happens to mirror the past 20 disappointing years in corporate France. Since 2005 French companies’ gross operating surplus has hovered around 15-16% of GDP and the CAC 40 index of the largest ones has returned a piddling 3.5% a year. The ten blue-chip businesses part-owned by the state have done even worse. They include makers of aeroplanes (Airbus, Safran), arms (Thales), cars (Renault, Stellantis) and materials (Saint-Gobain), utilities (Engie, Veolia), plus a bank (Société Générale) and a telecoms operator (Orange). As a group, they represent 21% of the index’s market capitalisation—and generated no shareholder value in the 20 years to January 2025.Meanwhile, American business has zoomed ahead. Its profits rose from less than 15% of GDP in 2003 to around 18.5% in the early 2020s. Since the start of 2005 the S&P 500 has ballooned five-fold, yielding a compound return of 8.2% a year. Three American technology giants, Microsoft, Nvidia and Apple, are worth more apiece than the entire CAC 40. France’s most valuable firm, Hermès, a $280bn manufacturer of pricey bags and scarves, wouldn’t make America’s top 25.France is not as étatiste as it was. But the state remains meddlesome. In 2023 it strong-armed grocers to freeze prices of hundreds of everyday food items. Dealing with its representatives on corporate boards is impossible, says an executive with experience of the ordeal. Even when it does not own a stake, it can interfere—as it did in 2005 by blocking PepsiCo’s takeover of Danone, a French yogurt-maker that the government could not bear to see swallowed by an American rival.Mr Trump’s views on the strategic importance of dairy products are unknown. He has ignored Mr Bannon’s SpaceX suggestion. He is a tax-cutter at heart (even if it means exploding debt). And his administration appears too undisciplined to enact French-style five-year economic plans. Still, American bosses are right to be on alert for more soupçons of Mr Trump’s unlikely Francophilia. ■Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.