Business - Muslim “modest-wear” is a hit with fashionistas of all faiths

Long hemlines and loose styles please the fashion gods. Eid al-Adha, which began this year on June 6th, is nicknamed the “Muslim Met Gala” for good reason. The three-day Islamic holiday is an opportunity not only for religious observance but for worship of the fashion gods, as revellers dress up to the nines. As Muslim spending on fashion grows, designers are bringing out collections aimed at the observant. What’s more, even non-Muslims are adopting the trend for “modest-wear”.Modest fashion’s primary market is the world’s billion or so Muslim women, many of whom dress conservatively. Muslim consumer spending on fashion will reach $428bn by 2027, up by more than a third since 2022, forecasts DinarStandard, a research firm. Online searches for modest-wear are highest in the run-up to summer wedding season and religious occasions like Eid. In the past month, modest apparel has been one of the five most popular fashion categories on the British version of TikTok Shop, a social commerce platform.Spotting the growing demand, Western brands are targeting modest dressers. ASOS, a British fast-fashion retailer, has a modest-wear section on its site with items offering fuller coverage. Nike, which introduced a “pro hijab” in 2017, has since unveiled a modest-swimwear line (the hijab costs $38 and the swimsuits $130—not so modest on the wallet). Designer houses, including Alexander McQueen, LVMH and Versace, have dropped Ramadan and Eid collections in recent years.Muslims are not the only ones spending on conservative fashion. Modest-wear’s crossover with current trends has pushed it further into the spotlight. Social media are saturated with looks such as “Scandi minimalism”, “old money” and “quiet luxury”, which feature relaxed fits, long sleeves, high necklines and long hemlines. Pinterest, a social platform, has seen searches for “modest dresses fashion” and “baggy outfit ideas” more than quadruple in the past year. On TikTok the hashtag #modestfashion has over 12bn views.Trends come and go: skinny jeans and bum-grazing shorts will no doubt return in due course. But spending on apparel by Muslims is set to rise. DinarStandard predicts continued increases of 6% a year. As Muslim markets grow, the modest-wear business will not be going out of style any time soon. ■