Business - The 11-year-old Ukrainian YouTuber snapping at MrBeast’s heels

Diana Kydysiuk is growing up—and growing rich—on camera. FROM MONDAY to Friday, Diana Kydysiuk’s life looks much like that of any other 11-year-old, with her time taken up by school, gymnastics and judo practice. But at weekends Diana becomes the star of home-made videos that are viewed billions of times by people around the world. “Yeah,” she says shyly, “it’s weird.”She is technically too young to watch YouTube without parental supervision, but Diana is the face of its sixth-most followed channel. “Kids Diana Show” has more than 135m subscribers, placing it behind only MrBeast (who does elaborate stunts and competitions), two Bollywood brands and a couple of other children’s shows. Add in 20 sister channels, in languages from Arabic to Vietnamese, and Diana’s YouTube empire claims to clock more than 10bn views per month. Few people in the world are as closely watched.Her story is a case study in the curious world of online superstardom. Diana is a celebrity among pre-schoolers while being broadly unknown to anyone else. Her setup combines a professional media business with a home-made approach. And it exemplifies how, in the new media economy, children are not just big consumers of content but suppliers too.Diana’s entertainment career began in Kyiv when she was a year old. The first video on her channel shows her sitting in a buggy, trying to eat a leaf, as her mother, Olena, gently dissuades her in Russian. (It has been viewed nearly 2m times.) Olena and Volodymyr, Diana’s father, started using YouTube to share home videos with friends and family. Soon they began aiming at a wider audience, filming toy “unboxing” videos—catnip for pre-schoolers—and adding jolly soundtracks and graphics. Her parents’ backgrounds in computer programming and marketing proved a useful foundation.As their channel grew in popularity, the family made it a full-time job. In 2018 they switched the main language from Russian to English and left Ukraine, first for Miami and then for Dubai, where they have lived for the past five years. “I used to do really bad with English, but now it’s the opposite…sometimes I even forget Russian words,” says Diana, who doubles up as her mother’s translator while speaking to The Economist between filming.The channel has nimbly adapted to YouTube’s ever-changing algorithm. Its videos now are mainly roleplays, often with a loosely educational slant: one recent film is about how to sort rubbish into different bins. Diana explains what succeeds, with the admirable frankness of an 11-year-old: “Educational videos that will keep the kids entertained and will give the parents an advantage to do something else than look after their kids. Because, obviously, kids are kind of annoying.”The family’s production set-up is the usual YouTubers’ mixture of home-made and high-end. Olena comes up with the ideas for videos while Volodymyr manages the financial and legal side. Mum and dad both appear in many films, speaking in strongly accented English. A Ukrainian family friend does the PR. After nearly a decade of success there is still no website.Yet in other ways Diana’s operation is a serious business. Videos take up to four months to produce, and the family employs set designers, crew, writers and actors. They have built several filming locations in Dubai that can be turned into a house, a maze or a garden—“whatever our imagination calls for”, says Olena, with evident pride.Diana’s parents decline to talk about their finances. But the main channel is likely to make around $10m a year from ads after YouTube takes its 45% cut, estimates Jeremy Goldman of eMarketer, a research company. In addition, there are brand tie-ins, which have the potential to generate millions more in revenue, believes Mr Goldman. In one recent video, sponsored by Mattel, an American toymaker, Diana shows off that company’s latest Barbie dolls (“Awesome!” “Cool!” “Yay!” declares a chorus of sound effects).The channel’s biggest audience is in America—handily, as that is where YouTube’s ad rates are among the highest. Diana is also popular in India and has a following in Brazil, Spain, Portugal and the Middle East, her parents say. They maintain a Ukrainian-language channel—“we felt it was our duty to create it,” says Olena. Since Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, revenue from Russian-language channels has dropped, the family says, though overall viewing hasn’t fallen. Diana has not been back since the war broke out in 2022.Being made famous by algorithm is a strangely uneven experience. Diana’s fame is concentrated among young children, who are also by far the most intensive consumers of so-called user-generated content. Children under 15—who have come to be known as Generation Alpha—spend nearly twice as much time on video-sharing platforms as they do on subscription streamers like Netflix, and three times more than on live television, according to a recent study in Britain. Hollywood studios, chasing adult subscribers to their streaming services, seem to be losing the battle for young children’s attention.Diana has mixed feelings about growing up in her parents’ viewfinder. She has travelled the world and tested more toys than most children will see in all their Christmases. But, she admits, “when I get noticed, it’s kind of uncomfortable for me.” At meet-and-greets up to 5,000 people line up for a picture. “It can be hard to stay patient, but I have to keep smiling and saying hi to everyone,” she says.The rise of “kidfluencers” has raised questions about their legal status. Over decades the entertainment industry has come up with rules to protect child performers (not always effectively). Children on YouTube, whose clips are often recorded and uploaded by their parents, are in a grey area. Several American states have passed laws to protect child social-media stars, following high-profile cases of exploitation. One of the latest such laws, in Utah, compels parents who make more than $150,000 a year from such content to set aside 15% in trust for the child, who also gets the right to delete any footage once he or she turns 18.At 11, Diana is dealing with the same confusing transitions as other children her age. “I like horror movies and movies that are for adults. But then there’s also shows like ‘My Little Pony’ that I like. So it’s complicated,” she says. For the family, Diana’s looming teenage years also present a business conundrum, as she starts to outgrow her core audience. Lately she has been cutting down on filming to make room for schoolwork and hobbies.Fortunately for the family business, Diana’s brothers—aged 12, four and two—are taking part in videos too. At weekends, the children film on a rotating schedule to keep the content flowing. If one child happens to be unavailable, says Olena, “we simply switch to another kid. That’s how our system works.”■