Culture - The 15 best films and TV shows released so far in 2025

Stories from Las Vegas, Rio de Janeiro and a galaxy far, far away. “Adolescence”This taut, anxiety-inducing show, about a 13-year-old boy (Owen Cooper) accused of murdering a classmate, is captivating. The acting is impeccable and the show’s themes—including masculinity and online brainwashing—resonate.“Andor”The “Star Wars” universe has, surprisingly, produced a sophisticated show about authoritarianism. It follows Cassian Andor (Diego Luna) as he is transformed from an apolitical thief into a rebel against the Galactic Empire. The show’s writers understand the machinery of repression.“The Clubhouse: A Year with the Red Sox”This eight-part documentary series follows Boston’s baseball team. It is a triumph of editing, with terrific access to the team over the course of 162 games. Athletes open up about their mental health and family struggles, revealing the toll a long season takes.“Dying for Sex”After Molly (Michelle Williams) is diagnosed with stage-four cancer, all she can think about is intercourse. She separates from her husband, who has not touched her in years, and embarks on a series of sexual adventures. A drama that is at once frank and funny.“Hacks”This comedy continues to delight in its fourth season. Deborah Vance (Jean Smart) has finally landed her dream gig as a late-night tv host. But there’s a catch: her head writer is her former protégée who all but blackmailed her way into the job.“Holy Cow”After his father dies, Totone gets a job with a cheesemaker in his rural French village. When a local contest offers thousands of euros for the best Comté, he sets out to make his own batch, with the help of some ragtag friends. A story of mischief—with a good dollop of dairy.“I’m Still Here”This Oscar-winning film is set in Brazil in the early 1970s during the military dictatorship. After her husband is taken away by plainclothes policemen, Eunice (Fernanda Torres) perseveres in her hunt for information about his disappearance. It is a story of love and resolve.“The Last of Us”The first season of the hit video-game adaptation was memorable for its nerve-shredding intensity. The second has more than matched it in ferocity. Much of the horror comes not from the threat of the Cordyceps fungus, but from the desperate, vengeful people living in a post-apocalyptic world.“The Last Showgirl”Shelly (Pamela Anderson) has run out of road, professionally speaking. She has been a dancer in Las Vegas for three decades, but the opportunities to shimmy about in a sparkly bikini do not come round as often as they used to. Ms Anderson’s own performance is at once sensitive and guileless.“The Narrow Road to the Deep North”A masterful adaptation of Richard Flanagan’s prizewinning novel. Dorrigo Evans (Jacob Elordi), a surgeon in the Australian army, is captured by the Japanese during the second world war and sent to work on the Burma Railway.“The Pitt”Each episode of this exhilarating and addictive medical procedural chronicles a single hour on shift at an overworked, underfunded emergency room in Pittsburgh. The show honours the work of people doing the best they can with what they have.“Severance”This surreal show, now in its second season, is TV’s greatest drama of modern office life. Employees of Lumon Industries receive a brain chip that cleaves their consciousness in two. Their “outies” have no knowledge of their work, their “innies” no memory of their outside lives.“Sinners”This film is a work of multiplicity. Smoke and Stack are identical twins (both played by Michael B. Jordan) who open a juke joint in Mississippi in 1932. The movie is a medley of cinema genres that are typically kept apart: horror, blues musical, action flick, period drama. Vampires make an appearance; so does the Ku Klux Klan.“Toxic Town”In the 1980s and 1990s Corby Borough Council, in the East Midlands of England, cleared the site of a former steelworks, transporting noxious material in open trucks. Local children were subsequently born with deformities. Jodie Whittaker is captivating as Susan McIntyre, one of the mothers who took the authorities to court.“Warfare”Set during the Iraq war, this movie recreates the end of the Battle of Ramadi, in which Ray Mendoza, the co-director and a former Navy SEAL, fought. His focus is on the visceral immediacy of combat. There is no exposition or discussion of the political context; nor is there a score—only the sound of violence. ■These titles are available to watch in America and/or Britain.For more on the latest books, films, TV shows, albums and controversies, sign up to Plot Twist, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter