Culture - The melting of the Arctic will bring peril—and opportunity

What happens at the North Pole will impact people everywhere. THE NORTH POLE has captivated people for millennia. Long before anyone got there, it existed vividly in the imagination as a cornucopia of treasures, a dark den for sea monsters or an open ocean linking opposite points of the world. Today the Arctic is still a site of peril and promise. A new race to the North Pole is under way, as politicians dream of accessing mineral wealth buried in the permafrost and opening new trade routes through the Arctic.This is possible only because the planet is heating up. Global warming is happening faster at the top of the world than anywhere else. This winter the maximum extent of Arctic sea ice was the smallest it has been on record. As the ice cap melts, rising seas could destroy coastal cities and swallow low-lying islands. Three very different books shed a chilling light on what is at stake for the region—and the world.In “The North Pole” Erling Kagge, a Norwegian explorer, recounts the long history of human expeditions to the end of the Earth. It starts with Pytheas, a Greek astronomer, who sailed far enough in the 320s BC to see the Northern Lights. It then describes the many efforts of European cartographers in the 1600s and 1700s to find a pathway to Asia through the Arctic. Later came explorers, enlisted by imperialist governments and sponsored by newspaper barons, who undertook dangerous journeys for the sake of a good story.Mr Kagge himself trekked to the North Pole in 1990: he and a friend were the first to reach it by ski. Details of his trip are included throughout his account. As for other intrepid adventurers: many died, falling victim to cold, hunger, scurvy or polar bears. Yet their efforts have fed a romantic notion of the Arctic and pushed the frontier of understanding of what lies up north. Explorers’ names—from Barents and Franklin to Ross and Scoresby—populate Arctic maps.The information these men relayed has helped others conduct research at the poles. In “Ends of the Earth” Neil Shubin, an American fossil-hunter, corrals the latest science to describe what sets the regions apart—and their vital role for the planet. The book is full of great facts. Almost 70% of the world’s freshwater is trapped in ice. The ice preserves fossils and meteorites, providing clues about the beginning of the universe, pre-historic times and life on Mars.For most of Earth’s history, Dr Shubin points out, it was more or less ice-free. Ice at the poles, but only at the poles, is a recent state of affairs—yet it is one under which every milestone of human evolution has happened. Dr Shubin sets out the probable consequences of a warming planet. As ice in the west Antarctic breaks down, seas could rise by up to four metres. Ocean currents might slow or stop, transforming weather. Perhaps hundreds of frozen ancient viruses would be released.But where many see biblical disasters, some see opportunities. In “Arctic Passages” Kieran Mulvaney, a journalist, tells of how the vanishing ice cap at the North Pole could make the holy grail for explorers past—the discovery and exploitation of new shipping lanes through the far north—more attainable. Before long, the Arctic Ocean could be free of ice in summer. That is opening up three possible passages for commercial vessels: the North-west Passage, which hugs Canada’s Arctic coast; the North-east Passage, along Russia’s Arctic coast; and the Transpolar route, which goes straight over the North Pole. Mr Mulvaney looks at each passage in turn, combining reportage with recollections of three voyages he made in those regions. A trip through the North-east or North-west passages from, say, the Netherlands to Japan would be thousands of kilometres shorter than ones via the congested Panama or Suez canals.Mr Mulvaney is primarily interested in the geopolitical rivalries sparked by the accelerated thaw. Russia, which claims sovereignty over much of the Arctic Ocean, is reopening and modernising its Soviet-era bases on the coast. China, which has declared itself a “near-Arctic” state, is building a mighty fleet of ice-breakers.A new cold war seems inevitable; but not, Mr Mulvaney suggests, a hot one. The countries bordering the Arctic do not seem to know exactly what they want. Russia would like international traffic in the North-east Passage, but creates big barriers to its development. China’s supposedly ambitious Arctic strategy is hardly mentioned in its five-year plans. Canada has embraced its northern territories, then neglected them, then made them a focus of its national identity. America wants to take possession of Greenland—or does it?The closing message of all three books is that the future of polar regions is not preordained. “We have moved from seeing polar worlds as vast, wild landscapes to places that can be directly manipulated, even possibly designed,” writes Dr Shubin. He describes some scientists’ mooted geo-engineering solutions to shore up polar glaciers—by erecting deep-sea barriers, for instance, or pouring torrents of icy water on them. As these books prove, the region is not frozen in time. Thinking about the Arctic is no longer a niche obsession; it is a task of vital importance. ■For more on the latest books, films, TV shows, albums and controversies, sign up to Plot Twist, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter