Leaders - Spain’s scandal-plagued prime minister should step down

Pedro Sánchez needs to let his country’s democracy renew itself. Spaniards SEEM to be doing well these days, especially compared with some of their neighbours. Since 2022 growth in their economy has far outpaced that of the euro area as a whole. Unemployment, though still over 10%, is at its lowest since 2008. And this is despite a sharp rise in the minimum wage since Pedro Sánchez, a Socialist, became prime minister in 2018. Mr Sánchez has passed a useful labour reform, strengthened the welfare state, welcomed immigrants and taken the European lead in recognising a Palestinian state. His supporters see him as a last bastion of social democracy against the hard right. Despite leading a minority government, Mr Sánchez has kept the country ticking over pretty well.Until now. The prime minister emerged weaker from a snap election he called two years ago, at which the mainstream conservative People’s Party (PP) won the most votes. He clung on in the Moncloa Palace because his motley crew of allies—the hard left, as well as Catalan and Basque nationalists—preferred him to voting with Vox, a hard-right outfit. But he has paid a price for their increasingly unreliable support.In the past few weeks Mr Sánchez has also been badly hurt by a corruption scandal. The two men he picked to run the Socialist Party for him since 2018 both now face trial for taking bribes on public contracts (which they deny). Recordings indicate that one of them hired prostitutes together with an associate—hypocritical in a party that proposes to ban prostitution. On Mr Sánchez’s orders, the two party leaders ruthlessly sidelined internal critics. That means he has no one else to blame.Polls show that Spaniards are more disillusioned with their politicians than any other Europeans, apart from Bulgarians, Greeks and Slovenes. Mr Sánchez has repeatedly apologised for his aides’ transgressions. But that is not enough. To restore faith in Spanish democracy, the prime minister should take responsibility and step down. There is no good reason for him to stay on. Spain’s economic growth predates him and owes rather less to his reforms than to those of his conservative predecessor, Mariano Rajoy. It would continue after him. He has placed political lackeys in supposedly independent institutions. He has not managed to pass a budget since 2023.It is now Mr Sánchez’s allies, not his party, who set the agenda. He is ever more vulnerable to their policy blackmail. The only weighty legislation passed in the current parliament was an amnesty for those involved with an illegal attempt by Catalan separatists to secede from Spain. This has damaged the credibility of democratic politics: Mr Sánchez opposed it as unconstitutional until he needed Catalan nationalist votes to stay in office. Spain’s NATO partners reluctantly agreed to let the country raise defence spending to just 2.1% of GDP rather than 3.5% like the rest, but Mr Sánchez has not dared seek parliamentary approval even for this, since the hard left would vote against it. A bill that would give the government-appointed public prosecutor, instead of judges, control over the judicial police looks to critics like an attempt to shut down investigations into his circle. Another ill-advised bill seeks to impose a 37.5-hour week, with no loss of pay, on all businesses.Mr Sánchez came to office thanks to a censure motion against Mr Rajoy after courts condemned PP politicians for corruption. That he has not yet fallen in the same way owes everything to Vox: other parties fear that voting the PP into office would mean a government backed by the xenophobic populists of the hard right. Yet that need not be the case.There are two other ways Spain’s paralysis could end. One would be for Mr Sánchez to call a party congress and hand over leadership to a party elder. The prime minister has made confrontation with the PP, as well as Vox, his method of government; a different leader could seek a constructive relationship with the moderate opposition. The second route would be an early election. Mr Sánchez would probably lose it. But two more years of ineffectual gamesmanship will only further tarnish the positive aspects of his legacy. The prime minister should use his summer holiday to ponder the interests of his party and his country, and act accordingly. ■Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.