The world this week - Business

The European Union reached a preliminary trade deal with America, which gave Donald Trump most of what he wanted. EU exports to America will be subject to a 15% tariff. Mr Trump had threatened 30%. The 15% duty applies to cars made in the EU, a lower rate than Mr Trump’s sectoral levy. Meanwhile, the bloc will eliminate tariffs on American-made vehicles and a range of other goods, including aircraft and chipmaking equipment. The EU also committed to buying more American energy and investing more in the United States. Ursula von der Leyen, the president of the European Commission, insisted the deal was “the best we could get”.Other countries scrambled to reach trade deals with America before an August 1st deadline. An agreement with South Korea leaves it with a 15% tariff on its goods. It had faced a 25% duty.More companies reported the impacts from tariffs. Mercedes-Benz blamed the duties for a decline in sales in North America and Asia in the first half of 2025, year on year. Taking the EU trade deal into account, it now expects sales for the full year to be “significantly below” last year’s. Ford ran up $800m in tariff costs in the second quarter and swung to a net loss. And Procter & Gamble said trade levies would cost it $1bn, and that it would have to raise prices across a range of consumer goods.The Federal Reserve kept its benchmark interest rate on hold, at a range of between 4.25% and 4.5%. The central bank said that inflation remained “somewhat elevated”, but recognised that growth had “moderated”, possibly signalling a future rate cut. For the first time since 1993, two governors dissented from their colleagues and voted for a cut.The Bank of Japan left its key interest rate unchanged, at 0.5%, but raised its forecast for inflation.Microsoft’s net profit soared by 24% in the second quarter, year on year, to $27.2bn, as revenue from its data centres surged. The company announced even more investments in AI. And Meta’s stock shot up after it reported solid earnings. “Superintelligence” is going to improve every aspect of the business, said Mark Zuckerberg.Tesla signed a $16.5bn deal with Samsung for the South Korean company to supply it with chips from its factory in Texas. Samsung will make Tesla’s next-generation A16 chips for use in autonomous cars and robots, though production is still years away.America’s economy grew by 3% in annualised terms during the second quarter, a better showing than most economists had expected. A drop in investment was offset by an increase in consumer spending, among other things, said the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Separate data showed the trade deficit in goods narrowing to its lowest level in two years in June, as imports fell sharply.The IMF raised its forecast of GDP growth for the world economy this year to 3%, from the 2.8% it projected in April. That is partly because America’s tariff increases have not been as big as threatened on Mr Trump’s “Liberation Day”. A weaker dollar has also cushioned the blow for many countries. America’s economy is now forecast to grow by 1.9%, up slightly from April’s estimate, and China’s by 4.8%, up from 4% in April.America could get its first-ever rail operator to transport goods seamlessly from coast to coast. Union Pacific, which carries freight in the west of the US, agreed to buy Norfolk Southern, which operates in the east, creating a transcontinental company worth $250bn. The deal will attract intense scrutiny from regulators, and could be blown off track by objections from unions and other interested parties.Novo Nordisk, which makes the Ozempic and Wegovy weight-loss treatments, issued a profit warning for the year amid increasing competition in the American market from compounded versions of the drugs and from Eli Lilly’s rival remedies. Its share price sank by almost 30%. The company appointed a new chief executive, Maziar Mike Doustdar, though that did little to allay investors’ concerns about its growth prospects. Parvus Asset Management, an activist hedge fund, is reported to be building a stake in the Danish firm.Renault also got a new chief executive. François Provost was the surprise choice to succeed Luca de Meo, who has left to run Kering, a luxury-goods company.There was some evidence that the efforts by Boeing’s chief executive, Kelly Ortberg, to turn round the business were gaining traction. The company’s cash burn, the rate at which it spends cash reserves or capital to fund operations, slowed to almost nothing in the second quarter and it recorded a smaller net loss than Wall Street had expected. Boeing‘s delivery of 280 aircraft in the first six months of 2025 was the most in a first half since 2018.America’s Federal Communications Commission approved Skydance Media’s acquisition of Paramount Global, ending the takeover’s lengthy legal saga. The transaction is expected to close within weeks.