United States - America is remaking its disaster-relief system

The administration hopes to undo perverse incentives. Five years ago the people of Calcasieu Parish had their annus horribilis. Within ten miserable months this corner of south-west Louisiana earned the unenviable distinction of four presidential disaster declarations. In August 2020 came Hurricane Laura, a storm so vicious that it peeled roofs from homes as if they were lids on tin cans. Buildings swayed like cruise ships and devices to measure wind speed broke. Next came Hurricane Delta; then Uri, a winter storm; then a bad bout of flooding. After Joe Biden stepped in, government men in polo shirts and khaki trousers arrived with chequebooks. An area built by oil, gas and petrochemicals was rebuilt partly by Uncle Sam.Calcasieu Parish—the Louisiana term for a county—is a good place to consider America’s system of disaster response and what might become of it under President Donald Trump. He thinks the federal government pays too much and that states should bear more of the cost. Initially he spoke of eliminating the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), which oversees relief. After a flood in Texas in early July killed more than 135 people, Mr Trump softened. Now his administration talks of making FEMA more “efficient”.Still, the direction of travel is clear. Already a fifth of the agency’s permanent staff have left; the president is denying some governors’ aid requests and taking longer to approve others; and the homeland-security secretary, who sits atop FEMA, insists on personally approving expenditures above $100,000.Mr Trump’s approach will bring changes both harmful and salutary. If he follows through, poor, hazard-prone places such as Louisiana will suffer the most. The state gets nearly $1bn on average from FEMA per disaster; it cannot possibly fill that gap. Louisiana, says Craig Colten, an emeritus professor of geography at the state university, excels at getting others to pay when it runs into trouble.There lies the potential for changing perverse incentives. A paradox of disaster policy is that aid comes from the federal government, but decisions about land use—where and how to build—are made locally. This creates a moral hazard: localities forgo insurance and pursue development in disaster-prone places, then expect a bail-out. Mr Trump’s approach should force states to think proactively about reducing their risk amid the ravages of climate change, says Susan Crawford, an emeritus professor at Harvard Law School. In time, that ought to constrain losses.Over the past half-century the federal government has assumed an ever-larger role in relief. Initially it limited itself to flood control and repairs to public infrastructure. In the 1960s it began offering subsidised business loans, subsidised crop insurance and subsidised flood insurance to households. Mission creep continued. Seventy years ago the share of total catastrophe losses borne by the federal government was less than a tenth. Today it is at least half, and sometimes much more.The federal government is not just doing more during each disaster. It is also showing up for more of them. The president has the authority to declare one—which turns on the money tap. Over the past decade or so the president declared 63 a year on average, up from 25 in the 1980s.Meanwhile some hazards are getting more severe because of climate change and more costly because of population growth in disaster zones. The year 2005—when Hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma hit—marked an inflection point. Average annual appropriations to FEMA jumped from $5.8bn between 1990 and 2004 to $25bn between 2005 and 2021. The average over the past five years was $42bn, driven by the pandemic (see chart).FEMA provides two types of aid after a declaration. One programme is for individuals. The pot available to localities, known as Public Assistance, is much bigger; they get reimbursed for debris removal and repairs to public buildings. These grants operate as a cost-share, with the federal government covering a minimum of 75% and localities paying the rest. Sometimes presidents stump up more. Mr Biden covered 90% of Louisiana’s outlay after Laura.In April a FEMA memo proposed ways for Mr Trump to cut federal spending, by declaring fewer disasters and reimbursing at the minimum rate. This will impact victims differently depending on where they live. FEMA comes to town when damages exceed a certain threshold: a state’s population multiplied by $1.89. Thus populous ones already have experience handling sizeable disasters on their own. Texas, for example, will normally not get FEMA help for anything under $60m.Federal aid evens out disparities between rich and poor places. Mr Trump’s cuts, if they happen, will make recovery more difficult for the hard-up. But it should discourage risk-taking. There is little incentive to invest in mitigation or buy insurance if you expect taxpayers to make you whole. This dynamic applies less to individuals—they stand to get only a few thousand dollars on average from FEMA—than to local governments.Sure enough localities forgo insurance in anticipation that they will get bailed out by the feds. In 2020 a study by the RAND Corporation, a think-tank, found that just 28% of Public Assistance recipients’ building-repair costs were covered by insurance. FEMA could do more to encourage localities to buy insurance by denying grants to uninsured applicants or raising its reimbursement rate for insured ones. Relatedly, it could require states to pay a “disaster deductible” before they get federal funds, so they have skin in the game. A consequence of Mr Trump’s approach is that states will be compelled to reduce risk. Louisiana does not appear to be doing this. Between 2001 and 2019 a fifth of the country’s new floodplain development occurred there, according to a study in Earth’s Future published last year. Granted, nearly half the state sits in the floodplain. John Fleming, Louisiana’s treasurer, insists that the Trump administration’s talk of efficiency means maintaining the same level of funding while cutting Washington bureaucracy. “I see this as a very positive thing for our state and I welcome President Trump’s effort,” he says. He is confident that the “buffet platter” of aid will continue. That may be right—or it may be naive. Officials in Calcasieu Parish, for their part, understand what is at stake. Dennis Bent, who works for the school board, does not hesitate when asked what it would mean to have to rely on the state government instead: “We’re in trouble.” ■Stay on top of American politics with The US in brief, our daily newsletter with fast analysis of the most important political news, and Checks and Balance, a weekly note from our Lexington columnist that examines the state of American democracy and the issues that matter to voters.