The Americas - Panamanian farmers versus global shipping—and Donald Trump

A new dam should ease the Panama Canal’s water woes. Those against it don’t have a chance. In A remote part of Panama, where motorised canoe is the main mode of transport, a pristine asphalt road portends the arrival of infrastructure unwanted by many locals. In February the Panama Canal Authority (ACP) approved a $1.6bn project that will see the Indio river dammed, flooding the lands of 630 families who live in the basin. In May, dozens of farmers waving Panamanian flags took to the Indio in their canoes to protest against the decision. “This land is our heritage and our livelihood,” says Olegario Cedeño, a coffee and plantain farmer. “They haven’t given us any chance to debate this project.”Panama is among the world’s wettest countries, yet it has a serious water-supply problem. Lake Gatun, in the middle of the country, was created in 1913 by damming the Chagres river. Along with a series of locks, it forms part of the Panama Canal, the waterway that ships use to cross the Panamanian isthmus between the Pacific Ocean and the Caribbean Sea. The lake is the main source of water for the locks, as well as for Panama’s largest cities, supplying water for half the population. During droughts, when water levels in Lake Gatun are low (they have dropped more in recent years because of climate change), the number of ship crossings must be cut while taps run dry in Panamanian houses.Damming the Indio is supposed to fix these woes. Mr Cedeño and the farmers face powerful adversaries. Panama’s president, José Raúl Mulino, agrees with the ACP that damming the Indio is the most efficient solution. Doing so will create a new reservoir that will replenish Lake Gatun through a tunnel nine kilometres (six miles) long. “Those who oppose the Rio Indio [dam] oppose progress,” says Mr Mulino.The reservoir will also benefit global trade. Some 40% of container traffic to the United States passes through the canal. When crossings are cut because of low water levels, ship owners face a choice: queue up for days, go the long way around Cape Horn, or pay for a pricey auctioned transit. Fees for those spots are so high that, despite a 29% drop in transits in 2024, ACP revenues held steady.The United States wants the dam, too. Sky-high auction prices are part of what prompted Donald Trump’s pressure campaign earlier this year. The concern is captured in the argument made by US Senator Ted Cruz in January, that high transit fees at times of drought affect Americans more than anyone else, as most of the cargo going through is bound for the United States. The only comfort to delayed ships, he said, was that “Panama may invest in more freshwater reserves in the future”. Now that comfort has arrived. The ACP approved the dam shortly after Marco Rubio, the American secretary of state, visited the canal in February. The ACP denies that pressure from the United States influenced its decision.The dam was a priority long before Mr Trump’s eye turned to Panama. The day after Mr Mulino’s inauguration in July 2024, the Supreme Court declared unconstitutional a law passed in 2006 that had reduced the area of the water basin around the canal that is administered by the ACP. With the Indio once more under its control, the ACP can invoke Panama’s constitution. “Under the constitution we are obliged to protect water resources for the operation of the canal and drinking water for the population,” says Ilya Espino de Marotta, the ACP’s deputy administrator.Resettling people like Mr Cedeño will eat up $400m of the ACP’s budget for the dam. Ms Espino de Morotta notes that during the ACP’s census of the region, 85% of the population gave information voluntarily. But she and her colleagues should be on their guard. Panamanians are on edge. The country has been rocked by protests against the government’s social-security reforms, its tepid response to Mr Trump’s pressure campaign over the canal and its apparent plan to reopen a big copper mine.Mr Cedeño says locals’ lack of say in the project breaks the Escazú Agreement, a regional treaty on environmental rights in Latin America, to which Panama is a signatory. The farmers argue there is another way to meet the canal’s needs: a 100km pipeline from the Bayano reservoir in the east of the country. With Mr Trump breathing down their necks, neither the ACP nor Mr Mulino is likely to listen. ■Sign up to El Boletín, our subscriber-only newsletter on Latin America, to understand the forces shaping a fascinating and complex region.