United States - Donald Trump’s redistricting ploy is politics at its most cynical

But the Democrats’ response is self-defeating. Could there be a more poignant figure in American public life than the tough-talking Democratic politician? There are plenty of them these days. You might have heard one on a podcast, dropping an F-bomb with a Pentagon planner’s care, or seen one on a cable television show railing about Donald Trump while trying to sound a bit like him—cocksure, blunt, “authentic”. These Democrats, particularly the ones angling to run for president, know that their party’s donors and other activists want a fighter. Their problem, having lost control of every branch of government, and having achieved a collective approval rating lower than Mr Trump’s, is that they can’t seem to get themselves into a fight they can actually win.Now, in a bid to out-Trump Mr Trump, Democrats are spoiling for their least ennobling fight yet: to redraw congressional districts to favour themselves. As usual Mr Trump struck first, demanding that Republican officials who control the Texas government redraw the boundaries of its congressional districts so that Republican voters predominate in even more of them. He wants to give Republicans better odds in the midterm elections next year, to protect their thin majority in the House of Representatives for the rest of his term. By threatening the same partisan manipulation in states they dominate, Democrats are out to display their feistiness, and, it seems, their command of cliché. “Never bring a knife to a gunfight,” enjoined Governor Phil Murphy of New Jersey. “All’s fair in love and war,” observed Governor Kathy Hochul of New York. The toughest talker, Governor Gavin Newsom of California, warned, “If we don’t put a stake into the heart of this administration, there may not be an election in 2028.”The Democrats are right to be angry. Mr Trump’s Texas power play is shocking by the standards of past presidents, who at least made the pretence of rising above such partisan games. By contrast, in mid-July, Mr Trump announced to his retinue of reporters precisely what he had in mind: “A very simple redrawing: we pick up five seats.” This is classic Trumpian political alchemy: by being so brazen—or is the right word “transparent”?—he converts political chicanery, if not corruption, into a kind of honesty; he makes himself an anti-politician by engaging in the most blatant of politics. He has taken a similar approach to pardons for political allies and demands for campaign contributions, not to mention augmenting his fortune while in office.In the case of redistricting, Democrats are choosing to race Mr Trump to the bottom. That is bad news for anyone still hoping to resist cynicism about American politics. For Democrats, the further problem is that it may not help them eke out more seats. Under the constitution, states draw their congressional districts every ten years, after the census determines the number and distribution of Americans. Each party generally hopes to delineate, or “gerrymander”, districts favourable to itself, however tormented their shapes. The Supreme Court objects to gerrymandering along racial lines but has said the federal courts have no business interfering in gerrymandering done for partisan purposes. Yet there is widespread public disgust with the practice. In 2022 a bill to ban partisan gerrymandering passed the House but fell two votes short in the Senate.Other than when forced to redraw boundaries by a court, states have rarely redistricted within the ten-year cycle. Some states have acted to prevent such shenanigans and partisan gerrymandering altogether. This is one obstacle to Mr Newsom, who is in the vanguard of Democrats now intent on redistricting. In 2010 California voters amended the state constitution to put redistricting in the hands of an independent commission. Mr Newsom would need to call a special election and persuade the voters to reverse themselves, or get the legislature somehow to remake the commission.Then the other headaches would begin, says Bruce Cain, a political scientist at Stanford who helped Democrats run the first computerised California redistricting, in 1981. Progressive and centrist factions would fight over the make-up of each district, while countless interest groups would also demand a say, as would the citizens. The lawsuits would practically file themselves. And beneath the partisan self-interest in shaping districts, Mr Cain notes, would lie a layer of personal self-interest. Many state legislators would have ambitions to run for Congress themselves, further complicating negotiations over districts’ boundaries. “Even to try to pull it off is a disaster,” he says. “I just can’t imagine that fighting over a few seats is a good thing for a party that’s got too many issues to resolve already.” Besides, though less than half of California’s voters are registered Democrats, Democrats already hold 43 of its 52 House seats.Similar obstacles would confront efforts in other Democratic states. In those where reforms have not been put in place, such as Illinois and Maryland, districts are already so gerrymandered it would be hard to reapportion Democratic voters without putting incumbents in danger by leaving them with too many Republican voters. Such too-clever-by-half redistricting is common enough that it has earned its own name, dummymandering.This is a hazard for Republicans in Texas, too. The governor, Greg Abbott, was reported to have resisted Mr Trump at first, because Republican members of the Texas delegation were anxious about the risks of diluting the Republican presence in their own districts. The president’s party has lost seats in the midterms all but twice since 1938. Rather than spend their time redrawing maps to parcel out voters, Democrats would be better off working out how to appeal to far more of them—maybe by fighting for stuff that matters, including a politics with some integrity. ■Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.