United States - Modular homes are helping LA’s wildfire survivors rebuild

Could factory-made units ease America’s housing shortage, too?. ON THE EVENING of January 7th Steve Gibson and his wife Charlotte saw a glow in the sky. “We opened the door and the street lights were out, but there were embers in the air,” he recalls. The Eaton Fire was closing in on their little house in west Altadena. Their home burned, along with more than 16,000 other buildings across Los Angeles County that month. The six months since have been a confusing whirl of hotel stays, paperwork and questions about how to rebuild. Mr Gibson craved speed, so he turned to Cover, a startup that builds granny flats (Americans call them accessory dwelling units, or ADUs), at its factory south of Los Angeles.Pre-fab homes have enjoyed a surge of interest since the fires. Groups of victims visit Cover’s factory. Samara, a firm founded by former Airbnb executives, offers tours of a model home in nearby Thousand Oaks, which survivors come to visit most weekends. The startup is working with Steadfast LA, a non-profit run by the city’s business elite, to donate modular homes to people who can’t afford to rebuild.The American Enterprise Institute, a conservative think-tank, reckons America could be short roughly 6m homes and that California’s deficit is 1.8m. In 2023 McKinsey, a consultancy, calculated that off-site housing production could cut project timelines by as much as half and knock a fifth off the cost. Factories that use automation are more able to withstand labour shocks during, say, a pandemic or a mass deportation campaign. Pre-fab homes are common in Japan and the Nordics, but make up only about 3% of America’s existing housing. Could that change? The mini-boom in modular housing that is coming to LA could portend wider adoption—if the industry can shore up several weaknesses.Unlike construction crews, which are hired for specific jobs, factories need to run constantly to be efficient. That requires having a pipeline of homes to build even when interest rates and the cost of lumber and steel are high, as they are now. Tragically, climate change may help. Helping rebuild communities after fires, which are growing in frequency and severity, is keeping factories humming. The state of Hawaii is building 450 modular homes to temporarily house 1,500 survivors of the fire that razed Lahaina in 2023. Mike McNamara, Samara’s boss, sees the fire-resistant features of its homes (metal roof, no attic, air filters) as a big selling point. But some Altadena residents worry that untested pre-fab startups will try to capitalise on their plight.Lenders are leery of modular housing, so most people who can afford a pre-fab granny flat are already wealthy. Samara’s biggest model, a two-bedroom cottage, costs about $277,000. But the price roughly doubles after customers pay for local taxes and fees, permitting costs, utility hook-ups and the lorry and crane needed to put the house on the lot. Even that is half the $1.2m median listing price in Altadena, itself evidence of the state’s self-inflicted housing crisis. Still, some firms are wary of revealing the cost of a home to inquiring reporters, given all the variables. “We’re not trying to be the cheapest way to build,” says Alexis Rivas, the boss of Cover, who stresses the quality and efficiency of his homes. A bipartisan bill that just cleared the Senate Banking Committee could make it easier to finance modular housing units. Better public policy could enable local experimentation.For all its promise, modular housing still has a lousy reputation. “People imagine a trailer,” says Carol Galante of the Terner Centre for Housing Innovation at the University of California, Berkeley. Mr Gibson says a local group in Altadena fretted that pre-fab homes would “ruin the community”, which is sprinkled with architectural gems. But uniform-looking neighbourhoods abound. America is dotted with homes people ordered from Sears catalogues in the early 20th century. Walk down the street in Cincinnati or Denver and the wide porches and brick chimneys speak of their common origins. Or consider the tract houses of Levittown and Lakewood. And modular doesn’t have to mean ugly: many ADUs channel the mid-century modern style popular in California.Samara and Steadfast LA’s first donated home is meant to arrive in October. Mr Gibson hopes to move into his new house by the end of the year. His lot sits empty. Yet there are small signs of revival: tomato plants are pushing through his neighbour’s fence, still yellow and eager for the sun.■Stay on top of American politics with The US in brief, our daily newsletter with fast analysis of the most important political news, and Checks and Balance, a weekly note from our Lexington columnist that examines the state of American democracy and the issues that matter to voters.