The Americas - Álvaro Uribe, a former president of Colombia, is convicted

The country is increasingly divided. It took Judge Sandra Heredia over ten hours on July 28th to read her judgment in the case against Álvaro Uribe, Colombia’s president from 2002 to 2010. Her verdict, when it came, was that he was guilty of arranging the bribing of witnesses and of perverting justice. He is the first Colombian president to be found guilty in court. The sentence, which will be announced on August 1st, could land him with up to eight years in jail. Since Mr Uribe is 73, he might be allowed to serve it under house arrest. His lawyers say they will appeal. “This isn’t a trial of history, nor an act of vengeance,” said the judge. “It’s an act of justice and only justice, and we ask that it be understood [as such].”There is not much hope of that. The background to the case indeed involves the past 30 years of Colombian history. Mr Uribe is one of the most powerful and controversial figures in the country. He left office with an approval rating of 75%. Still politically influential, his conviction will further polarise a country that under Gustavo Petro, its current leftist and populist president, already suffers from dangerous political confrontation.Mr Uribe’s case dates back to 2012, when he filed a criminal complaint in Colombia’s Supreme Court against Iván Cepeda, a left-wing senator. Mr Cepeda had brought witnesses into Congress to claim that Mr Uribe and his brother had formed a right-wing paramilitary group on one of their ranches in the 1990s. Mr Uribe cried slander. To advance his case, he hired Diego Cadena, a lawyer notorious for working for some of Colombia’s top drug-traffickers, whom his government had imprisoned. Mr Cadena (who is on trial separately and no longer works for Mr Uribe) was then accused of having offered jailed paramilitaries money and legal benefits to change their testimony against Mr Uribe. Some of those conversations were taped. That prompted the Supreme Court in 2018 to quash charges against Mr Cepeda and open a case against Mr Uribe, who claimed he knew nothing of Mr Cadena’s alleged activities. The judge did not believe him, saying he “knew his action was illicit.”The judgment was carefully argued, but Mr Uribe’s supporters have nonetheless cried “lawfare”, saying his conviction is political. Donald Trump’s administration quickly echoed that. It remains to be seen whether punitive tariffs will follow, like those levied against Brazil over the trial of Jair Bolsonaro, a former hard-right president, for an alleged coup attempt (which he too denies).For many Colombians Mr Uribe is the man who saved their country. When they elected him in 2002 Colombia was close to becoming a failed state. The communist FARC, other guerrilla groups and the paramilitaries of the United Self-Defence Forces of Colombia (AUC) controlled large swathes of the country. Promising security, Mr Uribe built up the army and the police, enabling the state to recover much territory. He slashed coca cultivation, depriving the armed groups of income. With the state back on its feet, he persuaded the AUC to demobilise; some of its leaders were jailed. His security build-up enabled his successor and former defence minister, Juan Manuel Santos, to reach a peace agreement with the weakened FARC.But there were stains on Mr Uribe’s record. The biggest was the “false positives”, some 6,000 young men killed by the army and passed off as guerrillas although they were not. Mr Uribe claimed not to know, but his critics argued that he had set incentives to raise the army’s “kill rate”. His intelligence service snooped on judges and opponents, before it was shut down. Out of office, he turned on Mr Santos and campaigned against the 2016 peace agreement with the FARC.Mr Uribe’s father was kidnapped and murdered by the FARC in 1983, which left him scarred. Mr Cepeda, too, is a victim of violence. His father, a communist who was murdered by paramilitaries, had become a senator when the FARC set up a political party, the Patriotic Union, even as it pursued plans to take power by force of arms. Some question why Mr Cepeda has spent many years trawling through the prisons to pursue Mr Uribe. They cite revenge and political ambition. As an adviser to Mr Petro, Mr Cepeda has been a key figure in the president’s “total peace” plan of talking to all illegal armed groups, including drug-traffickers. This has failed. Guerrilla groups are growing again and drug gangs are more powerful. In June a presidential hopeful from Mr Uribe’s party was shot at a rally; he remains in intensive care.Mr Petro, himself a former member of M-19, a guerrilla outfit, is a populist who is visibly frustrated by what he sees as the slim pickings of liberal democracy. Congress and the courts have blocked some of his reforms, a number of which are technically flawed. He is itching to call a referendum to write a new constitution, following the model of Venezuela’s Hugo Chávez. What the country really needs is good government. Having funnelled public money to client groups, Mr Petro may well get a candidate into the run-off for presidential elections next year.Colombia was once known for moderate, consensual politics. Next year’s elections already look polarising. Mr Uribe’s conviction will stir his fans on the right. “It makes it hellish for the centre,” says a depressed activist on that side. A legal defeat may give Mr Uribe a political victory. ■Sign up to El Boletín, our subscriber-only newsletter on Latin America, to understand the forces shaping a fascinating and complex region.