United States - What pro wrestlers in Chicago say about America

Beyond the WWE, liberals grapple with a MAGA bastion. At the Concord Music Hall, a venue in Chicago, two wrestling champions are preparing for their bout. A man wearing an inflatable eagle costume introduces the main contender. He is “the great USA-Hole”, dressed in cowboy boots, stars-and-stripes leggings, a shirt with a bald eagle, and a backwards stars-and-stripes baseball cap. Then comes his opponent, “CanaDad”, an overly polite father in double denim and a Canada jersey, to electronic strains of “O Canada”. As they warm up, USA-Hole shouts out an insult: “Bartender, I need some ice.” The crowd of about 500—many dressed in support of particular characters—erupts in boos.Welcome to the tenth edition of Superwrestlers, an indie wrestling league in Chicago. According to its YouTube channel it is “Earth’s strangest Pro Wrestling show!”, about which there can be little doubt. Besides USA-Hole and his opponent, the recent show featured Pharaohsmith, a character inspired by a mash-up of ancient Egypt and the rock band; Steven Flowe, a grungy teenager whose theme song is a parody of Pearl Jam’s “Even Flow”; and the Pubic Moose, wearing an antler hat and a large wig over his groin. At the end of the night “the King of Krosteria” travels “across galaxies” to bestow the prize—his kingdom—on the winner.Pro wrestling in America has long been dominated by World Wrestling Entertainment, or WWE, a behemoth with revenues of $1.4bn last year. But recently the franchise has been stuttering. Viewership of “Smackdown”, its weekly show, has declined after it changed tv networks last year. WWE Raw, a second show, has moved to Netflix. WWE’s once-prodigious revenue growth has tailed off. All Elite Wrestling, its biggest competitor, has been eating into its market share.And indie and alternative shows are booming, though few are as silly as Superwrestlers. Game Changer Wrestling, a “hardcore” wrestling league which started in New Jersey, has grown enough to put on shows all over the world. Its appeal relies on a higher level of violence. Then there’s the International Wrestling Cartel, an indie league in Pittsburgh, which is seen as a training ground for new wrestling performers. Imports are thriving too, such as New Japan Pro Wrestling, which is shown on axs, a cable-TV channel.What is driving the shift? Social media is part of it. A generation ago, wrestling fans could only watch what was on television, which meant WWE. Now new wrestling leagues can promote themselves on YouTube. In this world, weird can work—hence Superwrestlers. Larry Krasner, its founder, says Chicago’s large comedy and theatre scene inspired him to experiment by going beyond the traditional men-in-pants-competing-for-a-belt format. “We try to hook people on that, with the music and with the comedy and with the improv and, reluctantly, yeah, we have to have a wrestling ring in there,” he says.Could politics be playing a role too? With the possible exception of golf, few sports (or indeed, “sports”) are so closely linked to Donald Trump as professional wrestling. Vince McMahon, the co-founder of WWE, who resigned in disgrace after a sex scandal last year, is a close friend of the president. His ex-wife Linda is Mr Trump’s education secretary. Hulk Hogan, a WWE veteran who died on July 24th, tore off his shirt to support Mr Trump’s re-election bid at the Republican National Convention last year. Mr Trump’s own style of politics is often said to be inspired by “kayfabe”, the wrestling term for how everybody knows the action is fake but agrees to pretend it is not. It turns out that fans of USA-Hole can suspend their disbelief, too. ■Stay on top of American politics with The US in brief, our daily newsletter with fast analysis of the most important political news, and Checks and Balance, a weekly note from our Lexington columnist that examines the state of American democracy and the issues that matter to voters.