The Americas - Donald Trump’s unprecedented attack on Brazil’s judiciary

He has placed sanctions on the judge leading the prosecution of Jair Bolsonaro, his ideological ally. “Let this be a warning to those who would trample on the fundamental rights of their countrymen,” Marco Rubio, the US secretary of state, posted on X, a social-media service, on July 30th. The would-be human-rights trampler was Alexandre de Moraes, a Brazilian Supreme Court judge. The warning came in the form of sanctions placed on Mr Moraes under the Global Magnitsky Act, freezing his assets in American banks and prohibiting him from entering the United States.The Magnitsky Act punishes foreign officials for “gross violations of internationally recognised human rights”. It has previously been used against genocidal Burmese generals and Russian officials who murdered political dissidents. Mr Moraes has done nothing like that. His most noteworthy act is leading the prosecution of Jair Bolsonaro, Brazil’s far-right former president and ally of Donald Trump, who will soon stand trial on charges of plotting a coup to overturn an election he lost in 2022, which he denies.Targeting a sitting judge in a functioning democracy is unprecedented. The sanctions come days after the State Department revoked the visas of most justices on Brazil’s Supreme Court and other officials connected to Mr Bolsonaro’s prosecution. In justifying the sanctions Scott Bessent, the treasury secretary, claimed that Mr Moraes was carrying out “an unlawful witch-hunt against US and Brazilian citizens and companies”.After the sanctions were announced, Mr Trump signed an executive order placing tariffs of 50% on many Brazilian imports from August 6th. In the order he cited the “politically motivated persecution, intimidation, harassment, censorship, and prosecution” of Mr Bolsonaro. He did not mention trade imbalances, the usual justification for tariffs, perhaps because Brazil runs a deficit with the United States.Mr Moraes has been at loggerheads with the Trump administration and its allies since 2019. That year, the court opened what would become known as “the fake-news inquiry” to investigate misinformation on social media that affected “the honour and security of the Supreme Court and its members”. The probe was controversial from the beginning. Brazil does not have a legal definition of misinformation. By investigating, prosecuting and ruling on threats against itself, the Supreme Court demonstrated its excessive powers. Mr Moraes was appointed to lead the inquiry, bypassing the usual lottery system.The probe was meant to last less than a year. Instead, it continues six years later and its remit has expanded to include online disinformation about Brazil’s democratic institutions. The probe is sealed, so it is unclear how many social-media accounts Mr Moraes has ordered to be taken down, or why. In April 2024 the judiciary committee of the US Congress published a report showing that Mr Moraes had ordered X to remove at least 88 accounts since 2019, usually without providing justification. In February, Mr Trump’s media group and Rumble, a video-sharing platform, sued Mr Moraes, alleging that because his rulings affected Brazilians in the United States, they constituted overreach.None of Mr Moraes’s actions have been illegal on Brazilian terms. He is empowered by Brazil’s constitution, one of the world’s longest, which covers everything from health care to wages. It also allows Brazil’s president, state governors, the country’s bar association, trade unions, political parties and other groups to file lawsuits directly with the Supreme Court, instead of having them filter up from lower bodies. The court’s 11 justices issued over 114,000 rulings last year alone. To deal with this caseload, individual judges are allowed to make far-reaching decisions. This gives Mr Moraes and his colleagues on the bench enormous power, especially in areas where Brazil’s Congress has not legislated. Since it has yet to pass a law regulating social media, much of the enforcement has fallen to the court.Brazilian speech law is more restrictive than that in the United States. It prohibits discrimination based on race, gender, sexual orientation, religion or “physical or social condition”. Penalties for slander, defamation and libel are higher when made against public officials. In 2021, while Mr Bolsonaro was in office, Congress passed a law penalising “crimes against democracy” that include “restricting the exercise of constitutional powers” through serious threats or force. Equipped with this cocktail of laws, Mr Moraes has gone after Mr Bolsonaro and some of his fans.Those who decry Mr Moraes’s pursuit of Mr Bolsonaro seem to ignore the evidence in his prosecution. Bolsonaristas attacked government buildings on January 8th, 2023, after their leader falsely claimed that voting machines had been rigged against him. Mr Bolsonaro’s allies make the riot sound like a tea-party. “It was done by old ladies, with Bibles, with flowers, with flags, by the elderly, by children, without tanks, without leaders, on a Sunday,” says Rogério Marinho, a senator for Mr Bolsonaro’s party. Any cursory search of the riot shows that it was a vandalistic orgy. On December 12th, 2022, when President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva’s victory was certified by Brazil’s electoral court, Mr Bolsonaro’s supporters set buses and cars alight in Brasilia, the capital. On Christmas Eve one man strapped a bomb to a fuel truck near Brasilia’s airport, but it failed to go off.Mr Bolsonaro’s inner circle allegedly considered more thuggish actions to stay in power. According to federal police, his deputy chief of staff, Mario Fernandes, produced a plot to assassinate or kidnap Mr Moraes as well as Lula, as the president is known, and his running-mate before they could take office. The plan was allegedly printed out several times at the presidential palace in the last days of Mr Bolsonaro’s administration. It listed weapons to be used, including rifles, machineguns, grenade launchers and anti-tank rocket launchers, as well as chemical weapons to kill Lula in hospital, where he was getting check-ups. On July 24th Mr Fernandes admitted in court that he was the author of the document, but called it a habitual “risk analysis” and claimed that he had printed it out to avoid straining his eyes. He said that he did not share it with anybody.Police also allege that lawyers close to Mr Bolsonaro drew up a decree that would have called a bogus state of emergency to in effect annul the 2022 election. On June 10th Mr Bolsonaro admitted before the Supreme Court that he had called meetings in the presidential palace to discuss the possibility of declaring a state of emergency after losing the vote. He said he quickly abandoned the idea, which received pushback from generals.Messrs Rubio, Trump and Bessent may think that putting pressure on Mr Moraes will liberate Mr Bolsonaro. Yet their novel use of the Magnitsky Act could backfire. Lula now frames the Bolsonaro clan as “traitors”. Most Brazilians agree. Mr Moraes, who is accustomed to receiving death threats, is hard to intimidate. On the day the sanctions were announced he flew to São Paulo to watch his favourite football team play a match. ■Sign up to El Boletín, our subscriber-only newsletter on Latin America, to understand the forces shaping a fascinating and complex region.