Middle East & Africa - Ziad Rahbani held a mirror to Lebanese society

The musician and playwright died on July 26th, aged 69. GOOD art resonates with each generation. Ziad Rahbani might have wished that some of his did not. The plot of “Belnesba Labokra Chou?” (“What About Tomorrow?”), his classic play, is simple: a young man moves from the mountains to the city and finds work in a bar. But life in Beirut is expensive, so his wife turns to prostitution. It is a tale of a strained marriage and a strained society, the latter undergoing rapid urbanisation and an incipient civil war. Every Lebanese can quote its most famous line: “They say tomorrow will be better, but what about today?”The artist’s death at the age of 69 on July 26th triggered the rarest of things in Lebanon, a moment of genuine national unity. Hundreds of people gathered outside the Christian Orthodox church where his funeral was held. The prime minister came to pay his respects; so did the first lady. Mr Rahbani won acclaim for holding a mirror to Lebanese society. Nearly 50 years later, the reflection has changed little.He was to the manner born. His mother Fairouz is Lebanon’s most iconic singer, a diva whose haunting voice continues to enchant the Arab world. His father and uncle, Assi and Mansour, were composers and playwrights. They wrote songs for Fairouz and helped to launch the careers of other Lebanese artists.Yet in a country where nepotism is common, Mr Rahbani was something unusual: a talent in his own right. He pioneered a Lebanese twist on jazz. When his father and uncle wrote songs for Fairouz, their lyrics often harked back to an idealised village life. Ziad’s language was less grandiose, his themes more modern. One of his best-known compositions for her, “Kifak Inta” (“How Are You”), is a woman’s plaintive confession to an old flame.His plays, too, were written in the voice of the everyman: the bartender, the baker, the taxi driver. The earliest works were staged in the 1970s. Few were filmed. Those that were are too grainy to decipher. They endured for decades as audio tapes, passed around during and after the war like darkly funny samizdat.The themes he explored—stagnation, corruption, poverty—are no less relevant today. Lebanon is six years into an economic crisis that has robbed many people of their savings. The protagonist of “What About Tomorrow?” declines the offer of a well-paid job in the Gulf. Half a century later, that is still the only way many Lebanese can earn a decent living.He was a Communist, not uncommon for a man of his era. His ardent support for the Palestinians was more unusual, given that he came of age at a time when Christians and Palestinians fought on opposing sides. But that, too, was a mirror. He later said his political awakening came from watching a right-wing Christian militia massacre the inhabitants of Tel al-Zaatar, a Palestinian refugee camp.If his politics were iconoclastic in his youth, though, they ossified in his later years. He supported Hizbullah, the Shia militia and political party, even as it assassinated his fellow intellectuals (among them a former head of the Communist party). Later he backed Bashar al-Assad during the Syrian civil war. Ziad was adept at skewering Lebanon’s vanities, but he had a blind spot for the stagnant politics of resistance that has helped entrench so many of the country’s ills.The funeral was a rare public appearance for Fairouz, now a frail woman of 90. Trailing close behind her in the church, as if he were a member of the family, was the defence minister, Elias Bou Saab—who is also the highest-ranking Orthodox official in the government. Someone tried to steer him away from the front pew. He was undeterred. A priest opined on television that Ziad, a secular thinker (and probably an atheist), was a paragon of Christian thought. In life, some Lebanese try to transcend their sectarian identity. In death, confessionalism comes for them all.Indeed, he might have found much to satirise at his own funeral. The parade of politicians who mourned his death have promised Lebanon a better tomorrow. After years of war and economic collapse, though, many Lebanese are struggling to get through today. ■