Asia - South Asian women will be hurt by the trade war

Unless Bangladesh and Sri Lanka strike a deal with Donald Trump. ThE participation rate of women in the labour markets of South Asia is in general woefully low. The region’s garment factories, however, are exceptions. In Bangladesh and Sri Lanka around two-thirds of those behind the sewing machines are women. The industry has pulled millions of them into the workforce while spearheading the countries’ economic growth since the 1980s. But much hinges on selling cheap t-shirts and shoes to a country whose president’s favourite word is tariffs.Workers and industrialists have been on tenterhooks since Donald Trump announced “reciprocal tariffs” on most of America’s trade partners in February. America is the largest single-country buyer of garments from the region. Sri Lanka, which still faces a tariff rate of 30% after a four-month pause runs out on August 1st, relies on garment sales for more than 40% of its export revenues. Bangladesh, the world’s second-largest producer of ready-made garments, is renegotiating the 35% tariff that Mr Trump now says will come into effect that day. “This will be a disaster for us,” says Mohiuddin Rubel, a former director of Bangladesh’s garment manufacturers’ and exporters’ association.Since February, American buyers such as American Eagle and Walmart have put millions of dollars-worth of orders on hold. Mr Rubel’s own company has lost around 25% of his sales to America since March. A few days after Mr Trump renewed his threat of tariffs on Bangladesh on July 7th, Walmart told Iqbal Hossain, the managing director of Patriot Eco Apparel, a garment manufacturer there, to freeze $1.25m-worth of orders until more clarity emerges.Both women and men are likely to suffer. But there are fewer options for women to retrain or find other work. Unions say that temporary workers have already been laid off in Bangladesh. Lima Akhter, a 28-year-old woman who supported her family of eight by working at Patriot Eco Apparel, lost her job without notice in June, along with 40 others. “I used to pay for my children’s school fees and my parents’ medication,” says Ms Akhter. Instead, she has been obliged to borrow money from a microcredit company.In Sri Lanka companies have been citing the proposed tariffs in order to refuse to pay salary rises or bonuses. Ranil Wickremesinghe, a former president of Sri Lanka, has warned that if they come into effect they could put over 100,000 jobs at risk. Trickle-down effects would hurt at least 2.5m to 6m dependants, says Anton Marcus of the Free Trade Zones & General Services Employees Union in Colombo, Sri Lanka’s capital.American brands such as Gap and Walmart have also asked manufacturers to absorb at least half of the initial 10% tariff that Mr Trump has imposed during the pause. A number of small and medium-size companies suspended production, just as they were recovering from the after-effects of the revolution that toppled Sheikh Hasina, Bangladesh’s leader, in 2024. Over 800 businesses in the country will be affected, says Rashadul Alam Raju, general secretary of the Garment Workers Union Federation in Dhaka, the capital.“It is difficult for a single mother to survive and pay school fees without a job,” says Kohinoor Begum, a 35-year-old garment-worker who also lost her job last month in Bangladesh. Unions complain that when women factory-workers get dismissed, they struggle to get another position. Most leave their villages for factories in their late teens. They spend years repeating the same mechanical tasks without gaining new skills.Ahead of Mr Trump’s deadline, countries are renegotiating renewed tariff rates that may preserve some of their industry’s comparative advantage. Bangladesh is ramping up imports from America to convince the Trump administration that it can close its $6bn trade deficit. Recently the government ordered 25 Boeing aircraft as well. The Sri Lankan government says it is scheduled for another round of talks with America.Even so, both Bangladesh and Sri Lanka will need to undergo profound change to become immune to future shake-ups. Sri Lanka could offer America targeted benefits in high-value sectors such as tech to reduce its overdependence on clothes. This would have the added advantage of shielding the industry and its workers from the volatility of global trade structures, says Thiruni Kelegama at the University of Oxford. But for now, the next payslip of thousands may depend on giving Mr Trump what it takes to seal a deal. ■