China - Everyone loses in the rage of China’s delivery wars

Companies are caught in a race to the bottom. BOILED BEEF noodles gave He Wei a delectable idea. A decade ago the businessman, based in China’s wealthy coastal province of Jiangsu, started a small restaurant selling them. Now he has a chain of 100 such outlets. But life is getting less palatable for millions of small eateries and cafés across China. Not only is consumer spending sluggish, but the tech platforms that operate China’s food-delivery services are battling over prices, often dropping the cost of products to next to nothing and forcing merchants such as Mr He to cover the bill. Welcome to the front line of the “delivery wars”.It all began in February when JD.com, one of China’s biggest e-commerce groups, announced that it would enter the market for food delivery. This posed an immediate threat to Meituan, a super app and leader in the field, and to Alibaba, an e-commerce giant that runs its own food-delivery service called Ele.me. Since then, the three have scrapped for market share in a business which had a staggering 1.6trn yuan ($223bn) in deliveries last year.By lowering prices across the country, expanding the types of deliverable items and shortening delivery times, each combatant hopes to keep customers scrolling exclusively on their apps. Alibaba has attacked JD by offering “instant purchases” of goods such as electronics, which it promises to get to customers in under an hour. Meituan has also started selling “instant” smartphones and other electronics, while also promising it will not be late. The price of many coffee and tea drinks have come down to 1 yuan, or nothing.As pricing functions and special offers fluctuate, so do the stacks of delivery bags that pile up on counters in restaurants and cafés. Customers may place delivery orders while sitting in the very tea shop from which they want a drink. Vendors are in a bind: they must choose between slashing prices or simply being ignored for cheaper goods. Mr He says his revenue from on-premises dining has shrunk by 30% since April. His revenue for deliveries has jumped by 20% during that time, but profits on deliveries have tumbled by more than 20%. He is, in effect, doing much more work for much less gain, a phenomenon referred to in China as “involution”, or relentless, meaningless competition.Involution is one of the defining characteristics of Xi Jinping’s China. Price wars have swept up numerous industries as production of goods outpaces domestic demand. Competition on car prices has intensified to the point where automakers now struggle to pay their suppliers on time. About 80% of industrial sectors are reporting negative price growth compared with last year, notes Goldman Sachs, a bank.You might think that consumers were winning in a golden age of cheap goodies. Not so. Restaurants are cutting back on costs. Mr He says he is committed to keeping his dishes safe, but wonders what dodgy ingredients others may be forced to use. “If you pay three yuan for pork-fried rice, what do you think you’ll get?” he asks ominously. Delivery platforms have been forced in the past to crack down on rogue kitchens appearing in insalubrious places, such as public toilets.Meanwhile, the list of losers from the war is long. As margins decline, sellers rely on volume to squeeze out earnings. Big coffee chains may make very little per cup, but large turnover eventually adds up to a decent sum. Small shops cannot compete. Things are not easy for mid-tier restaurants either. Mr He shows a receipt for an order of beef noodles and two biscuits that would normally cost 30 yuan. But the customer had a third off in discounts. Mr He’s shop earns about four yuan on the transaction, but after platform fees and running costs it is hard to see how he profits.China’s platform companies may employ more than 10m delivery drivers. Think of them as the cavalry of the delivery wars. For those looking for work, the situation has certainly created more positions. JD has hired more of them to get its food delivery up and running. Meituan, which employs more than 7m drivers, says their average income has risen by 111% since June because of the flood of new orders.But the cavalry is suffering, too. Before the start of the delivery wars, the average driver made an estimated 33.6 yuan per hour, according to a recent study by Renmin University in Beijing. Now they report that their income per delivery is falling, and that they need to work far longer hours if they actually want to take home more pay. On top of that they put their lives on the line to get goods to customers on time. Delivery drivers are often accused of reckless driving; traffic accidents involving them are on the increase, according to certain hospital reports.Even the tech giants themselves appear to be losing. Meituan is said to make just one yuan per delivery. Analysts expect JD’s delivery service to lose 33bn yuan this year. Taobao’s “instant purchase” unit could create a hole in the company’s balance-sheets of 44bn yuan this year and 50bn yuan in 2026. Bocom International Securities, a Chinese broker, has lowered its profit forecast for Meituan by 17% this year. Their reputations are taking a hit, too. Netizens have been reposting a classical Chinese phrase used to describe the cruelty of the Qin Dynasty but swapping in the super-app’s name instead: “Life under Meituan is suffering,” they say.This cannot continue. In recent weeks the central government has shown that it wants to put an end to involution. On July 24th, its central-planning agency and its market regulator published proposed changes to the country’s price law, first put in place in 1998. The draft amendment would prohibit companies from selling items below cost based on their “pricing mechanism”, an oblique reference to the algorithms that widely determine the price of goods sold on e-commerce platforms. The proposed change to the law will probably take months to be approved by Chinese lawmakers.It is all part of a bigger campaign. Mr Xi declared in early July that companies involved in “disorderly price-cutting” would have to contend with more robust regulation. On July 30th the Politburo, China’s top decision-making body, signalled that it wants to curb price wars as a priority. In recent days officials in Shanghai have also called in the companies’ leaders to complain about the situation. And a food and beverage association in Guizhou province in southern China released a missive earlier this month claiming that the wars had led to chaos in the market and to a vicious cycle among small businesses.Through their delivery arms the tech giants have become some of the biggest employers in the country, however. Urban youth unemployment is a big concern for the Communist Party. It stood at around 14.5% in June, lower than the month before. Many of the platforms’ drivers are young migrants from inland provinces who a decade ago would have worked in factories. Such jobs are disappearing now as many Chinese manufacturers move to cheaper markets, and fewer young people are willing to work on production lines. While halting involution is now on the government’s agenda, senior leaders also value the employment these jobs offer. This is one reason the battles may rage on. ■Subscribers can sign up to Drum Tower, our new weekly newsletter, to understand what the world makes of China—and what China makes of the world.