Asia - Why Indians suffer from a colonial mindset

The overbearing role of the state has never been challenged. THIS month India will mark 78 years since it unshackled itself from Britain. In that time it has risen from being a desperately poor country reliant on food aid to becoming a net exporter of grain and a recognised nuclear power. It will soon be the world’s fourth-largest economy. Under the leadership of Narendra Modi since 2014, especially, Indians have gained new confidence in their own identity, shedding some of the hang-ups inherited from past generations. The India of 2025 is, on the surface, a modern, self-assured nation.Yet a spectre haunts Indians: the spectre of colonialism. Consider one example. Last month Prada, a fashion company, launched a style of sandals that bore a striking resemblance to a local product, sparking a minor furore. The Times of India christened the sandals “colonial couture”. The Hindu also decried Prada’s flip-flop colonialism. A member of a former royal family called on the government to “act decisively against companies that unlawfully appropriate our millennia-old crafts.” One commenter on X chimed in: “Please take strict action against @prada.”Spotting insidious acts of colonialism is like seeing the image of the Virgin Mary on a slice of toast: a matter more of belief than evidence. And belief is something at which India excels. Any Western company, politician or commentator unwise enough to express an opinion—or utter a fact—not wholly complimentary to India is accused of harbouring a “colonial mindset”. Yet it is the follow-up that is more revealing. It is not uncommon for Indians to look to the state for redress, seeking bans, probes or penalties against the offender. The former royal so irate about Prada, for example, did not just complain into the void but tagged the prime minister’s office.Nor are such calls restricted to acting against offensive foreigners. A glance at X posts tagging the home ministry—responsible for crime and public order—reveals Indians requesting the intervention of the highest levels of the state for the most minor transgressions, even when those concern their own compatriots.This is India’s very own colonial mindset. It is a deeply held belief—among leaders and citizens both—that the state sits at the centre of society and must be in control of it. In Hindi this vision of the state is called the maibaap sarkar, or “mother-father government”. The maibaap sarkar nurtures and protects, but it must also discipline and punish.The colonial mindset is distinct from the colonial hangover. The hangover describes vestiges of the past that have never been eradicated. It can be found everywhere, from the country’s elite gymkhana clubs to its old-fashioned courts. The mindset evolved in part because of deliberate decisions taken during the creation of the new Republic of India. About a third of its constitution borrows directly from the Government of India Act of 1935, which was passed by Britain’s Parliament and laid out the principles by which the colony would be governed. Jawaharlal Nehru, India’s first prime minister, described it as a “charter of slavery”. The constitution is colonial in that it takes heavily from a colonial document, writes Arghya Sengupta, a constitutional scholar, in his book “The Colonial Constitution”. But it is also colonial “in a more conceptual sense: it sets up a government that towers over the citizen much like colonial governments tend to do.”Having fought a long battle to free themselves and their people from the yoke of colonialism, the founders of modern India found themselves in charge of a fragile and fissiparous new country. Liberal ideals were all well and good but, unsurprisingly, the urgency of keeping India whole took precedence. The preamble to its constitution carries echoes of America’s Declaration of Independence, which the framers admired. But where the first amendment of America’s constitution enshrines an inalienable right to free speech, the first amendment of India’s severely curtails it.In 2023 Mr Modi’s government junked the Indian Penal Code, from 1860, and replaced it with the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, a new version said to be fit for a modern country. The government made a big deal of excising the colonial-era crime of sedition from the new act. Yet it contains provisions that scholars and judges worry could simply become a proxy for the old offence. The mindset that sees the state as a parent persists. If Indians see colonialism everywhere, that is because they live in a country ruled by some of its principles. ■Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.