Europe - Why Italy’s next cultural capital looks like a disaster zone

Sixteen years after an earthquake, L’Aquila has yet to shake off the damage. Like most things, the Fontana delle novantanove cannelle, or 99-spout fountain, sounds better in Italian. It is among Italy’s lesser-known and more unusual monuments. The spouts, carved to mimic the faces of men, women and animals, line the walls surrounding a broad square on the outskirts of L’Aquila, a city north-east of Rome. Water gushes into a trough below.The fountain has become a symbol of the resilience of an ancient city that sits on one of Europe’s most seismically active regions. The most recent earthquake, in 2009, cost the lives of more than 300 people. Yet the fountain suffered only minor damage and reopened the following year. A notice attached to a damaged palazzo overlooking the square tells a sadder tale: its reconstruction began only on February 12th 2024. To judge by the scaffolding that envelops it, the work is far from finished.To encourage tourism and boost L’Aquila’s economy, the government has made the city Italy’s “capital of culture” for 2026. The title would be well deserved in any year. L’Aquila is often compared to Salzburg, another city ringed by mountains with a passion for the arts, especially classical music. Arthur Rubinstein, one of the 20th century’s foremost pianists, said L’Aquila had the most musically intelligent audiences he had encountered anywhere. Among the earliest efforts to restore morale after the disaster was the building of an all-wood, 238-seat auditorium designed by Renzo Piano. The city council sponsored an arts festival to coincide with L’Aquila’s main annual religious celebration, La Perdonanza. And there were several private cultural initiatives.“We knew we couldn’t play a part in the reconstruction of the buildings,” says Valeria Valeri, a secondary-school teacher. “But we felt we could do something to help rebuild the people.” The association she headed organised six book fairs in the years after the earthquake.The government’s decision to turn a spotlight on L’Aquila is nevertheless incongruous, because the city is also a symbol of institutional failure. Fully 16 years after the disaster it remains a place of cranes, scaffolding and construction-site mobile toilets. To be sure, reconstruction has been hindered by the NextGenerationEU initiative and a profligate government-sponsored home improvement scheme, both of which have diverted engineering and architectural skills elsewhere. But funding was never lacking, says Giustino Parisse, a local journalist who lost his father and two children when the earthquake ripped through the nearby village of Onna. After a period of homelessness, including a spell in a tent, Mr Parisse opted to use his own money to build a new house into which he moved in 2012. Just as well: the old one is only now being rebuilt by the authorities.L’Aquila’s mayor, Pierluigi Biondi, belongs to the hard-right Brothers of Italy party. He is unsure how many of the 80,000 or so people made homeless by the disaster are still living in the temporary prefabricated accommodation which occupies big chunks of villages around the city. He says 92% of the applications for rehousing have been processed. But, says Mr Parisse, “a lot of people have not returned, even though their homes have almost all been repaired or rebuilt, because of bureaucracy.”Yet the biggest outstanding issue is the reconstruction of L’Aquila’s public buildings: its government offices, churches and schools. The city hall was returned to the mayor and his staff at the end of 2023. But many of L’Aquila’s stately official palazzi remain shrouded in hoardings. The city’s most emblematic church, the basilica of Santa Maria di Collemaggio, has been impressively restored—by ENI, an energy company. Many other churches are still in ruins. Ironically for a city about to become Italy’s cultural capital, almost 4,000 of L’Aquila’s schoolchildren are still being taught in one- and two-storey “provisional scholastic-use modules”. These are manifestly unsuited to a city where temperatures range from almost 40°C in the summer to well below 0°C in winter. “I’ve been teaching for 14 years in one that was built to last for five,” says Ms Valeri.Among the buildings waiting to be fully restored is L’Aquila’s massive, daunting castle, built by southern Italy’s Spanish rulers in the 16th century. A large sign on the bridge that crosses the moat reads “Work in Progress: So Sorry.” The same could be said for all of sad, brave L’Aquila. ■To stay on top of the biggest European stories, sign up to Café Europa, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.