Middle East & Africa - Helen Zille wants to save South Africa, starting in Johannesburg

The chair of the Democratic Alliance has a lot to say—and a lot to do. Helen Zille has had a long career as a journalist, anti-apartheid campaigner and politician. She is a grandmother living in Cape Town, the city she ran as mayor from 2006 to 2009. But instead of enjoying her retirement in the Cape, as many inland South Africans like to do, the 74-year-old wants to move the other way. She plans to run for mayor of Johannesburg, the country’s commercial capital, next year.Her decision says much about the decay of Africa’s richest city. Johannesburg, which will host the G20 summit in November, is a mess. Power and water supplies are sporadic; potholes can be the size of craters. Ms Zille, who was born in the city to parents who fled from Nazi Germany in the 1930s, says that fixing it is “the hardest job in South Africa”. Yet her willingness to run for the post also says a lot about her status as a politician willing to speak out and get things done in a country replete with waffle and apathy. If she were to win, it would send a signal that her Democratic Alliance (DA) might, incredibly, replace the once-mighty African National Congress (ANC) as South Africa’s largest party.A few years ago it seemed that Ms Zille’s career was over. In 2019 she stepped back from frontline politics after a decade as premier of the Western Cape, the South African province of which Cape Town is the capital. By then she had put more people’s backs up than an incompetent chiropractor. In 2017 she attracted criticism for suggesting that colonialism was not “only negative”. The storm was partly a function of the message in a country where centuries of white rule cast a long shadow. But the messenger also mattered.As leader of the DA, whose base is the nearly 20% of South Africa’s population that is not black, from 2007 to 2015, she wanted to banish its label as the “white party”. She recruited and promoted aspiring black politicians, including Mmusi Maimane, who succeeded her as leader. But they then espoused policies—notably affirmative action—at odds with the DA’s classic liberalism. Internal fights pitted young black figures against party bigwigs opposed to “ANC-lite” policies. Ms Zille admits to a “self-initiated betrayal” of her liberal values in leading the DA into the ANC’s “‘race narrative’ arena”.Today she is very much back. The formation of the Government of National Unity (GNU), a coalition anchored by the ANC and the DA established in 2024, has given her further clout. Though she is not in government, as chair of the DA she still wields a lot of power.Time has not mellowed her. “I get into trouble all the time for telling the truth. But the truth has to be told, whether people like it or not…I’m not going to fudge around because I’m white.” Black Economic Empowerment, a set of regulations ostensibly aimed at increasing black South Africans’ stake in the economy, is “legalised corruption”, she says. The route to economic change is via “growth and jobs”, not redistribution on the basis of race.If Ms Zille has a grand theory of South Africa, it is that the country is a giant cultural experiment: a collision of liberal Western norms and more traditional values that hold sway in parts of the ANC and its offshoots. She says her “friend” the former president, Jacob Zuma (whom she calls a “lovely human being” who “looted the state”), is genuinely dumbfounded by courts’ efforts to tell him what to do. South Africa is trying to entrench a democracy in decades, when it took other countries centuries, she notes: “No one has made a democracy succeed in our context.”Increasingly, Ms Zille earns grudging admiration from South Africans. It helps that she can laugh at herself: this year she has appeared in a cooking show, dressed in an apron resembling lacy underwear, and in a comedy “roast” in which a comedian accused her of liking her political party the way she likes her coffee (“flat white”).But the jokes would be irrelevant were she not a person of substance. Her criticisms of the ANC have largely proved correct. Many South Africans are tired of racial controversies when they cannot get a job or reliable water and power.Pollsters who once found Ms Zille’s tough personality a liability now see it as an asset. In Johannesburg the ANC, which has the mayoralty, is in third place behind the DA and UmKhonto we Sizwe, Mr Zuma’s new-ish party. Property values have fallen in real terms since 2010 (while those in Cape Town have risen). Water cuts are common. The electricity provider is embroiled in corruption scandals. Voters, including in the black middle class, are more willing to give Ms Zille a closer look.To become mayor, Ms Zille will need to win enough votes and form a coalition, since no party will win outright. If she can, it will have broader lessons for the country. Since the formation of the current government, the DA has gained in the polls as the ANC looks weaker than ever. It is no longer out of the question that the DA could win more votes than the ANC at the next general election in 2029, especially since Cyril Ramaphosa will be stepping down as president. If Ms Zille can show black South Africans she can fix Johannesburg, her party could well get a nationwide fillip. ■Sign up to the Analysing Africa, a weekly newsletter that keeps you in the loop about the world’s youngest—and least understood—continent.