Europe - The German politicians who want to bar the AfD from government jobs

If the party cannot be banned, perhaps its civil servants can be. GERMANY’S DEAD-EYED bureaucrats are rarely the object of citizens’ affections. But could some be seeking to subvert democracy? Such was the concern of Michael Ebling, the interior minister of Rhineland-Palatinate, when he declared that members of the hard-right Alternative for Germany (afd) would be barred from public-sector jobs in his state. “Anyone who places themselves in the service of this state must remain loyal to the constitution,” he thundered. What ensued was, as the Germans call it, ein Shitstorm. Mr Ebling wavered, clarifying that afd members would be individually assessed rather than collectively banned. But the case encapsulates the struggle of Germany’s centrists to lock out an extremist party that is becoming part of the mainstream.Germany’s “defensive democracy”, a concept forged in the postwar republic’s early years with the memory of the turbulent Weimar period still fresh, demands eternal vigilance against enemies who seek to turn its own freedoms against it. Its most potent expression is a constitutional provision to ban extremist parties outright. That power, vested in the mighty Bundesverfassungsgericht (constitutional court), has not been exercised since the 1950s. But many mps, and over a quarter of Germans, wish to apply it to the afd, now Germany’s second-most popular party.Any afd ban would be years away. A more pressing question concerns the millions of Germans who work for the state: its civil servants, judges, teachers and police. Public employees, who enjoy strong legal protections, take oaths to uphold Germany’s state and federal constitutions. What if their behaviour violates that? Some civil servants have received warnings or pay cuts for, say, participation in right-wing extremist group chats, but most courts have frowned on attempts to fire them for activities unrelated to their jobs. A handful of afd politicians have been stripped of their jobs or pensions, but only after especially inflammatory statements.German law is clear, says Josef Franz Lindner, a law professor at the University of Augsburg: membership in a legal party cannot itself suffice to block or dismiss someone from a public-sector job. But state bodies may treat membership of the afd as grounds for especially strict vetting. That case has been bolstered by a recent ruling from the Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution (bfv), a domestic intelligence agency, that the entire afd should be labelled a “right-wing extremist group”, in part owing to its derogatory views about non-white Germans. Several states have added the afd to lists of extremist organisations that raise red flags, putting the party in the company of revolutionary Leninists and al-Qaeda.The bfv’s ruling is suspended while the afd appeals. But if it is confirmed, for many the logic will look irrefutable: if spooks and courts have determined that the afd is actively undermining Germany’s legal order, how can members of the party be trusted to uphold it in office? “If you choose to join the afd, you have joined a party that at least in parts is opposed to our constitution,” says Nicolas Fink, a Social Democrat member of the Baden-Württemberg state parliament. He wants individual afd members in the civil service screened now, and a consistent set of rules applied across Germany’s 16 states. Eventually he hopes to see the afd banned outright. That would force civil servants to choose between the party and their job.Yet worried detractors are put in mind of the “Radical Decree”, a measure approved in 1972 that saw millions of public servants screened and thousands—mainly communists and other leftists—barred from jobs as mundane as delivering letters. (One of them, Winfried Kretschmann, is now the Green premier of Baden-Württemberg, having shed the Maoism of his youth.) Acknowledging its excesses, the decree’s proponents scrapped it years later. Some of its victims still seek redress.As for the afd itself, “we won’t let ourselves be driven crazy,” says Sebastian Münzenmaier, one of its mps. In May the party urged its members in public-sector jobs to avoid intemperate language and personal attacks. Informal “patriotic networks” have sprung up to connect job-seeking members with friendly employers. More broadly, the party’s mps recently agreed to moderate their behaviour in parliament. Days later Alice Weidel, the afd’s co-leader, took the floor in the Bundestag to hurl insults at Friedrich Merz, the conservative chancellor, earning herself a reprimand. Old habits die hard. ■To stay on top of the biggest European stories, sign up to Café Europa, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.