Europe - Ever more Ukrainian women are joining the army

A growing group that is changing society. Commander Twig and her girls pull into a café near the Zaporizhia front and order non-alcoholic mojitos. In the distance is the occasional thud of outgoing artillery. The word “killing” implies murder, which would be wrong, says Twig’s comrade, Titan; she prefers to call her job “liquidating Russians”. The five-strong unit is one of a small but growing number of all-female drone crews. Genitals are irrelevant to flying drones, notes Maria Berlinska, a campaigner for military women.Unlike men, many of whom are unwilling conscripts, all Ukrainian women under arms are volunteers. They number about 100,000 of the country’s 1m military personnel. Some 5,500 are on the front line, says Oksana Grygorieva, a gender adviser to the armed forces. They include medics, drivers, drone crews and others. Before Russia’s full-scale invasion in 2022 about 15% of armed forces staff were female. The army’s huge growth means that though the share is smaller, the number of women serving has more than doubled.Perhaps 20% of the students in military high schools and universities are women, says Ms Grygorieva—a huge shift. Only in 2018 did Ukrainian legislators open such schools to women, and remove other restrictions on the roles they could fulfil. Laws against sexual harassment in the armed forces are now being tightened. The struggle is to ensure women “are not treated like second-class soldiers”, says Ms Grygoieva. Formal barriers may have gone but informal ones remain, says Katerina Prymak, head of Veteranka, which campaigns for military women’s rights.Alina Shukh initially tried to enlist in the prestigious Azov Brigade, but they said they had “no positions for women”. Instead she joined the more egalitarian Khartiia Brigade. As a former professional heptathlete, Sergeant Shukh notes, she is stronger than most male soldiers. In any case, says Olha Bihar, who commands an artillery unit, technology is changing warfare: the best killer may now be a tiny drone pilot with dexterous fingers. “All our stereotypes are changing,” she says; she hopes, some day, to be minister of defence.Ms Berlinska has been pushing to open more roles to women since Russia’s initial invasion in 2014. Invisible Battalion, a research project she helped found, revealed that many women were fighting despite laws barring them from combat, registering instead as cooks and cleaners. “Every war has boosted technological progress and the emancipation of women,” she says, and this war is no different. There has been no political debate about conscripting women. It might be risky, says Yevhen Hlibovytsky of the Frontier Institute, a think-tank. Ukrainian leaders may “fear that the Russians would smell strategic weakness” if the topic were opened. But with yawning gaps in recruitment, the idea cannot be ignored for ever.Not everyone is on board. In a command centre near Komyshuvakha, eight men in T-shirts and slippers sweat in front of live drone feeds. A banner on the wall depicts a naked, sword-wielding maiden. Asked why he has no female soldiers, the commander curses a blue streak: the front, he thinks, is no place for a woman. ■To stay on top of the biggest European stories, sign up to Café Europa, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.