Middle East & Africa - Can a home-grown telecoms firm connect South Sudan to the world?

Civil war need not be an insurmountable obstacle. What do Che Guevara, an Argentine revolutionary, and Tupac Shakur, an American rapper, have in common? Both were charismatic and died young. Yet De Chan Awuol, a South Sudanese telecoms executive, keeps their portraits on his wall in part because he reckons both men triumphed against seemingly insurmountable odds.Mr Awuol wants Digitel, the telecoms provider he launched in Juba, South Sudan’s capital, in 2021, to pull off something similar. Last year Digitel introduced the country’s first 5G service, ahead of multinational rivals. Mr Awuol says foreign firms have little incentive to roll out such tech across a poor, war-racked country such as South Sudan. Nor are they especially well-attuned to the demands of a market in which about 85% of the population is offline. By offering tailored products—such as phones with extra-long battery life—comparatively cheap data and, eventually, its own infrastructure, Digitel hopes to connect South Sudan to the world.This will be tough. As in several countries in east Africa, South Sudan’s telecoms market has long been dominated by a single operator. MTN claimed more than 60% of the market by the end of 2024, notes BuddeComm, a market-research firm. Previous attempts to loosen the South African behemoth’s grip have failed.Conditions today are even less propitious. Collapsing revenue from oil, the country’s main export, due to the civil war in neighbouring Sudan, has sent inflation soaring. The dollars needed to import new equipment are drying up. Conflict in several of South Sudan’s states makes it harder to build or maintain telecom towers.That alone need not doom Digitel’s ambitions. Telecoms companies should be “quite familiar” with war, says Nzioka Waita, the Africa head of the Tony Blair Institute, a consultancy. Somalia has a thriving local telecoms industry despite having been engulfed in war since the 1990s. Ethiopia’s state-owned operator reports record growth in revenues despite persistent insecurity there.Telecoms has long been an exception to the rule that African companies tend not to grow big. Though South Sudan’s economy as a whole is deteriorating, MTN reported a 25% surge in the number of mobile subscribers in the past year. Digitel’s own data suggests it is expanding its subscriber base faster than its rivals. Mr Awuol’s dream to “bridge the digital divide” in South Sudan is not totally far-fetched.■Sign up to the Analysing Africa, a weekly newsletter that keeps you in the loop about the world’s youngest—and least understood—continent.