Britain - In Britain, same-sex marriages are more common for women than men

But the men seem to benefit more. Twelve summers ago, a bill allowing same-sex marriages in England and Wales became law. If the institution seems to have been around for longer, that could be because it has rapidly become uncontroversial. Three-quarters of Britons now support gay marriage. Its enemies, which in the early 2010s included the Church of England, have mostly gone quiet. But how are the actual marriages going?They are certainly popular. Fully 7,800 same-sex weddings were held in England and Wales in 2022, a record. In that year one in every 31 weddings was between people of the same sex. Kate Hamilton of the Gay Wedding Guide, which lists gay-friendly venues and suppliers, says that many wedding outfits now depict same-sex couples in their marketing materials and train staff to deal with gay and lesbian clients. They would be foolish to do otherwise, especially considering that heterosexual couples are not exactly rushing down the aisles.In London and Manchester, most same-sex weddings join men. Those cities have large gay communities and established gay districts, which makes them obvious venues. The London borough of Westminster hosts more gay men’s weddings than any other local authority in England or Wales. But outside big cities the great majority of confetti lands on women’s shoulders. In Devon, for example, 137 marriages of women took place in 2022, compared with 46 marriages of men.In the Netherlands, which legalised same-sex marriage in 2001, men’s unions have proved to be more resilient than women’s. The Office for National Statistics has not released the data that would allow a precise comparison of gay and lesbian marriages in England and Wales, but it seems likely that the same is true. Women accounted for 58% of same-sex marriages between 2014 and 2022. Between 2015 and 2023 they accounted for 68% of same-sex divorces.Gay men do not rush into marriage. Civil partnership, a precursor to same-sex marriage that has become available to everyone, is more popular among male couples than female ones, though it is rare for all. When gay men marry they tend to do so late, which suggests that they want to be absolutely sure of their partners and their relationships. The average opposite-sex wedding unites a 35-year-old man and a 33-year-old woman. Women marry women at an average age of 34. But men marry men at an average age of 38. With a few more years’ experience of life, and possibly with more money and more secure jobs, it would not be surprising if their marriages are particularly strong.Moreover, marriage seems to benefit them especially. Fernanda Fortes de Lena and Diederik Boertien of the Centre for Demographic Studies in Barcelona have analysed a British social survey that tracks people over time. They estimate that marriage boosts earnings for gay men more than it does for lesbians, bisexual people or straight men (straight women’s earnings fall). The authors suggest that marriage might make gay men, but not women, seem more acceptable to employers. Whatever the reason, the increase is welcome. Those expensive Westminster weddings do not pay for themselves.■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in Britain, sign up to Blighty, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.