Britain - Britain presses on with its tilt to the Indo-Pacific

Despite signs of American misgivings. Not since 1997 had a British aircraft-carrier berthed at an Australian navy base. As HMS Prince of Wales pulled into port at Darwin harbour in the country’s Northern Territory on July 23rd, the old sight of a white ensign and union flag fluttering above a British carrier returned to Australian shores.The flagship of Britain’s Royal Navy is on a months-long deployment to the Indo-Pacific region as part of a carrier strike group. Her visit to Darwin marked the end of the strike group’s participation in this year’s iteration of “Talisman Sabre”, which was the largest military exercise Australia has ever hosted. In all, Talisman Sabre 2025 involved around 35,000 personnel from 19 countries—including, first and foremost, America, the co-host of the exercise.For Britain, it was the latest showcase of its much-touted “tilt” to the Indo-Pacific. First mooted in 2021 under the previous Conservative government, its animating ambition has been to deepen Britain’s defence, trade and foreign-policy partnerships in Australasia, not least in response to China’s assertiveness in the region. In opposition, the Labour Party at first dismissed these aspirations as boosterish folly: Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine highlighted the ongoing threat in Europe. The party has nonetheless stayed the course since taking office last year.That is partly because the policy looks more substantial than it once did. Britain is building a next-generation warplane with Japan and it is co-designing a nuclear submarine with Australia as part of the AUKUS pact, a weighty three-way deal announced by America, Australia and Britain four years ago.The docking of the Prince of Wales coincided with the visit of Britain’s foreign secretary, David Lammy, and its defence secretary, John Healey, to sign a 50-year bilateral treaty with Australia cementing their leg of AUKUS. The treaty sets the parameters for co-operation on the design and build of the future nuclear-powered submarines, as well as the industry and workforce requirements. It will create a “seamless defence industrial base” between the two countries, enthused Richard Marles, Australia’s defence minister.British officials have been especially keen to stress the economic benefits of all this defence co-operation. They estimate that the latest treaty will contribute some £20bn ($27bn) in exports over the next 25 years and support around 21,000 British jobs. “There are people not yet born who will benefit from the jobs secured through this defence deal,” boasted Mr Healey.This enthusiasm stands in contrast to recent murmurs of American tergiversation. A review of the AUKUS agreement by the Pentagon has some defence analysts concerned that the deal could be in trouble. Officials in the Trump administration have also expressed misgivings over the choice to deploy Britain’s thinly stretched military resources to Asia. Elbridge Colby, the Pentagon’s policy chief, recently pooh-poohed Britain’s decision to send an aircraft-carrier to the Indo-Pacific, and suggested that America’s close ally should focus on the Russian threat in its own back yard instead.For now Britain seems undeterred. In a statement after his visit, Mr Lammy and his Australian counterpart, Penny Wong, stressed the “interconnected” nature of the threats facing Europe and the Indo-Pacific area. On the flight deck of the Prince of Wales in Darwin, Mr Healey raised eyebrows by telling journalists that Britain would be “ready to fight” in a potential conflict over Taiwan. But such bravado, and even a visiting aircraft-carrier, do not mean Britain will really be there when it counts in this part of the world.■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in Britain, sign up to Blighty, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.