Britain - Does Nigel Farage’s plan for halving crime in Britain add up? 

No. But that might not be the point. NIGEL FARAGE hopes to turn Reform UK into a “serious party of government”. His anti-immigration party enjoys a comfortable lead over Labour and the Tories in the polls. But the next election is a long way off and, among other things, Mr Farage needs some more policies. On July 21st he turned his attention to crime, launching a six-week blitz to promote an approach that he calls the “toughest…this country has ever seen”.Reform does not make policy the traditional way. No analysis accompanied the announcement. Nor did the party publish the policies on its website. At a launch in Westminster, lackeys instead passed around a crude five-page printout. It included lots of short sentences, such as: “Fast Track Courts. 24/7 justice if necessary.” Some of these lines (“Cut the Cost of Prison by 20%”) would seem to require more explanation. Still, a party that aspires to seriousness should be taken seriously. So how does the plan stack up?Start with Mr Farage’s claim that crime has “rocketed since the 1990s”. Crime has risen in the past two years, driven by spikes in shoplifting and phone theft. Yet overall it is still down by 75% since 1995, when car theft and burglary were common. Mr Farage says official data are “completely false”, without elaboration. That may be because, if crime is indeed lower, his claim that Britain faces “nothing short of societal collapse” would sound ridiculous.Setting aside quibbles about the level of crime, Mr Farage plans to halve it within five years. Step one is recruiting 30,000 more police officers, at a cost of £2.1bn ($2.8bn) a year. Sarah Pochin, Reform’s justice spokeswoman, says the party’s preference is “great big strapping male” officers, who could impose curfews on youths, and stop and search one in five people in high-crime areas. “Society needs that tiny little bit of fear,” suggests Mr Farage.He is right that Britain’s police are not very good at catching criminals. Yet it is not obvious that the answer is more muscle. The police recently completed a huge recruitment drive. Labour will hire another 13,000 officers by 2029. Police chiefs are hardly calling for more beyond that. “It would have diminishing returns and wouldn’t cut crime much at all,” reckons Graham Farrell of Leeds University. The bigger challenge is attracting officers of high quality who can respond to crime smartly. Belittling half of your potential workforce is unlikely to help.Mr Farage’s next ideas are tougher sentences and more prisons. He would introduce life sentences for those who commit three serious offences and prevent early release for violent and sexual offenders, or those caught with a knife. Five “Nightingale prisons” with space for 12,400 inmates would be built in 18 months on Ministry of Defence (MoD) land. Reform says this could be done for £200,000 per prisoner.Successive governments have been desperate to build prisons, and struggled for reasons Mr Farage does not appear to have grappled with. The easy sites have been exhausted (even suitable MoD land is not abundant), and new ones take years to get past local opposition. Mr Farage’s costs seem to be based on an outdated quote for “rapid deployment cells”, prefabricated units which have been craned into existing prisons in small batches. Five new sites would cost much more and take longer. Meanwhile, tougher sentences would push existing prisons past breaking point.That leads to the third part of the plan: deporting prisoners. Mr Farage says he would repatriate the 10,400 or so foreign nationals now locked up and deport another 10,000 high-risk prisoners to countries like El Salvador. Britain already has 112 prisoner-transfer agreements, notes Catherine Heard of Birkbeck University. In the year to March it returned more than 5,000 prisoners. The constraint is that some countries try to extract outsize payments or allow those returned to walk free, reducing justice for victims.The idea of outsourcing high-risk prisoners is more novel. Based on Mr Farage’s back-of-a-fag-packet sums, it could be done for £25,000 per prisoner per year. Under the last government, discussions with Estonia ended because the costs were roughly ten times that. British law requires that a prisoner serving a sentence overseas has equivalent conditions. Even if Mr Farage repealed that and persuaded the public to let him send British murderers to a Salvadorean pit, the cost of getting them there would be prohibitive. (The enforced removal of a migrant who has not murdered anyone costs around £14,000.)Will such practicalities matter? Rachel Wolf, a former Tory adviser, thinks not: “On crime and culture Reform are sending the message ‘We are really serious about this and we might just be mad enough to do it’.” On the other hand, these policies add yet more dubious numbers to tax and spending plans that already look primed to cause a Liz Truss-style panic in the markets. If and when voters start to think seriously about life under a Reform government, it might just be the glint of madness that puts them off. ■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in Britain, sign up to Blighty, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.