Britain - What the World Snail Racing Championships says about rural England

Summer fetes show there is still hope for the English village. Arriving at The “Big Summer Bash” in Congham, in East Anglia, one cannot help but notice the peculiar containers carried by many visitors: oddly shaped tupperwares and terrariums, stuffed with foliage. Inside are small, slimy athletes. For this is the World Snail Racing Championships. And trainers from as far afield as South Korea, America and France have come to test their molluscs’ mettle.Their racetrack is a small table covered by a damp cloth stitched with two concentric circles, 13 inches (33cm) apart. Fifteen snails set off from the centre; the winner is the first to extend its antennae over the outer rim. That gets it into the final, where it competes to become world champion—and to break the world record, held by a snail named Archie. In 1995 he crossed the course in two minutes flat (equating to around 0.006mph).Until recently the competition took place as part of Congham’s church fete, an English summertime tradition where people pay a few pennies to throw coconuts at other coconuts, or guess the weight of a cake, to raise money for the local parish. The pandemic killed many village fetes, however, including Congham’s. Organising the licences, volunteers and produce became too daunting, particularly for committee members growing somewhat long in the tooth. Rural populations are ageing, and many of the schools, pubs and shops that served them have closed.But summer fetes are enjoying an unexpected revival. Organisers around the country report record fundraising totals (the closest proxy that free-to-attend events have for attendance numbers). One reason is the increasing presence of middle-class urbanites. Such people are often blamed for the decline of village life, pricing out locals without really integrating into the community. Yet in many places they have shown themselves to have the skills, resources, energy and time to organise a fete with the requisite enthusiasm.The Lurgashall village fete in West Sussex, for example, is run by a retired private-equity ace. Otford’s, in Kent, is chaired by a JPMorgan alum who moved from London. Eleanor Herring, co-chair of the World Peashoot Championships in Witcham, Cambridgeshire, moved to the area in 2021. The “vast majority” of those on the Compton village fete organising committee in Surrey “have moved here in relatively recent years”, says Miranda Wells, the chair.In Congham the snail contest is now run by Nicholas Dickinson and Ian Haynes, both newcomers. The two businessmen have built a rejuvenated version of the village fete around the mollusc match. This year’s edition, on July 19th, was marked by violent rain; last year’s by hail. Such is the British summertime. But snails thrive in the damp. As Alyssa, a passionate ten-year-old armed with several of her own racers, puts it: “Snails are amazing creatures. They’ve got that attitude about them that just makes you believe in them.”Sadly, no amount of belief could propel your correspondent’s snail, rented from the snail master’s stable for £1 ($1.35), to victory. Michael Shellmacher was pipped to the mark by Bilbo Sluggins, who, as it happens, went on to be champion. The final was a tense affair. Some spectators whispered that the French were cheating. Others bragged that their oversize Roman snails would outmuscle the rest. And as a hundred strangers sheltered from the rain under a testudo of umbrellas, you could not help but feel a creeping sense of hope for the English countryside. ■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in Britain, sign up to Blighty, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.