Business - Hello Kitty’s owner is purring contentedly

Sanrio is becoming a powerhouse of licensing intellectual property. A show called “Hello Kitty and Friends Supercute Adventures” might be expected to feature the world-famous cat more prominently than one of her lesser-known companions. In fact in its most-watched episode, “Kuromi’s Bad Day”, Hello Kitty plays a supporting role, cheering up grumpy Kuromi, a rabbit dressed in hot pink, with milk and a doughnut. Nor is this an isolated relegation. In an annual poll of fans’ favourite characters, Hello Kitty has won only once in the past decade.Sanrio, the Japanese “emotional commerce” firm which owns Hello Kitty, has been diversifying. My Melody, a cheery white bunny, co-stars with Kuromi in a new Netflix series. It is part of a makeover of Sanrio that began in 2020 when its then 92-year-old founder handed control to his grandson, 31. Operating profit rose from ¥2.1bn ($20m) that year to ¥51.8bn in the year ending in March and the stock has risen 13-fold, nearly doubling over the past year.Once reliant on toy sales, Sanrio has since turned to licensing intellectual property. This now makes up half of revenues. The company’s long-term strategy envisions blanketing fans with Sanrio content to “deliver smiles to as many people as possible”, using a wide cast of characters.Sanrio’s next task is conquering foreign markets, especially North America and Europe. Its share of revenue outside Japan generated by Hello Kitty has fallen from 90% in the 2010s to about half today, as her friends are taking more of the spotlight. The company’s expanded cast list has a vital role to play in ventures including new in-person experiences, such as a café opened last year in California dedicated to Gudetama, a slothful egg yolk.Sanrio faces stiff competition from more entrenched franchises as it seeks to expand, including Star Wars and Pokémon, another Japanese export. So some fear the recent craze for its shares is overdone. Perhaps a firm trading on emotional commerce has sent investors on a supercute adventure.■