Culture - The humble tomato salad holds lessons for how to eat well

An exquisite Italian iteration proves that even simple dishes can be sublime. The fruit is arrayed on a wooden board, where shades of red jostle with yellows, oranges and flecks of green. After you lift a fork to your lips, a varied, almost confusing range of flavours follows, from tantalisingly sour and bitter, through umami, to succulently sweet.The dish in question is a tomato salad: often considered mundane, but here transformed into something memorable. Tomatoes are ubiquitous at this time of year when, in the northern hemisphere, they are most abundant and tasty. This particular tomato salad is served at Quintosapore, a farm in central Italy. Its deliciousness points to three culinary tenets.The first is obvious: local produce is best. Tomatoes plucked straight from the vine, where they have been ripened by the Umbrian sun, are sweeter and juicier than those picked from a supermarket shelf, which have often been harvested prematurely and ripened artificially.The second tenet is the importance of variety. A tomato salad with one type of tomato is bland; a salad prepared with a dozen varieties is surprising. There are around 160 types of tomato grown at Quintosapore, for the farm is also an experimental nursery: Nicola and Alessandro Giuggioli, the brothers who run it, have been fascinated by plants since they were young. “Other kids collected stamps,” says Alessandro. “We collected seeds.”Cultivating multiple strains of a foodstuff certainly broadens the range of gastronomic possibilities—some tomatoes are earthy in flavour, others are tart—but there are practical as well as palatable benefits to this approach. It limits the danger of a disease or pest latching onto a single, popular variety and endangering the supply of an entire species.Last comes the vital role of garnishes, which add both colour and complexity to a dish. Part of what makes this salad so exceptional are the three varieties of basil that are added along with huacatay, a herb also known as Peruvian black mint. Chewing it releases a range of aromatic compounds—including several that are found in other herbs such as tarragon and basil—which deepen the flavour of the tomatoes.Italy produced almost 1.2m tonnes of tomatoes in 2024. (In Europe, it is second only to Spain.) But the country’s love affair with the fruit is relatively new. Native to South America, tomatoes were for centuries thought to be poisonous. It was not until the 19th century that Italians started using them widely in their cooking.The country has made up for lost time. Along with olive oil and garlic, the tomato is now a staple ingredient in Italian cuisine: it features in a plethora of dishes, from spaghetti all’amatriciana to insalata caprese. More than any other nation, Italians know that, as the food writer Laurie Colwin put it: “A world without tomatoes is like a string quartet without violins.” ■