Culture - With a four-octave range, Cleo Laine could sing everything—and did

The “First Lady of Jazz” died on July 24th, aged 97. She was cool; she was clever; she was chic. Dame Cleo Laine, a virtuosic singer, glided across British tv screens in the 1960s and 1970s, a symbol of the free-spirited mood of the age. The four-octave range of her voice stretched from husky contralto depths up to glittering top notes that operatic sopranos would have struggled to reach. She sang just about everything from Shakespeare to standards; her repertoire spanned avant-garde theatre, Broadway musicals, jazz classics, pop tunes and the witty, subtle songs that her husband—John Dankworth, a jazz saxophonist, bandleader and composer—wrote for her. Now that voice is finally silent. Dame Cleo died, aged 97, on July 24th.Where had this marvel sprung from? Although an aura of cosmopolitan glamour surrounded her, Dame Cleo grew up in Southall, a district in London’s western suburbs. Her father, Alexander Campbell, was a Jamaican veteran of the first world war who loved to sing. His daughter recalled that he dressed like Anthony Eden, a famously dapper prime minister in the 1950s. Her mother, Minnie Bullock, was a farmer’s daughter from Wiltshire who fiercely defended her mixed-race family.Clementine—Cleo, the snappier stage name, came later—left school early. In 1951 she auditioned for a singer’s job with the Johnny Dankworth Seven, a jazz ensemble. It was a warm summer’s day, but she wore a borrowed fur coat and sang “Embraceable You” and “It’s Only a Paper Moon”. Dankworth was astonished to hear not another mimic of the day’s chart-toppers but “a finished article, who sung like herself”. He offered the novice a salary of £6 a week (£165, or $220, today). She held out for £7, and got it.They married in 1958, after Dame Cleo had divorced her first husband and started to embark on solo projects. She took dramatic roles at the Royal Court Theatre—the hub of London’s experimental theatre scene—and, in 1961, sang in Kurt Weill’s and Bertolt Brecht’s musical satire “The Seven Deadly Sins”. Lotte Lenya, Weill’s widow and the role’s originator, jealously refused to let Dame Cleo record it.She smashed through musical borders, not only leading British jazz into the mainstream, earning the moniker the “First Lady of Jazz”, but forging alliances all over the musical map. “Shakespeare and All That Jazz” (1964) perfectly matches Dankworth’s stylish verse settings to Dame Cleo’s agile delivery. She performed Arnold Schoenberg’s demanding song-cycle, “Pierrot Lunaire”, and took a lead in a hit production of Jerome Kern’s musical “Show Boat”. In 1973 she conquered Carnegie Hall with a solo show; a decade later another performance there won her a Grammy award. A critic at the New York Times pouted that the Brits had been hoarding “one of their national treasures”.Musical partnerships followed with Ray Charles, Tony Bennett and Frank Sinatra. Stephen Sondheim’s grown-up, bittersweet songs fitted her mature voice like the smoothest of gloves: her renditions rank among the best.She had two children with Dankworth and both went on to become successful musicians: Jacqui Dankworth as a singer and Alec Dankworth as a bassist. The couple also built and oversaw a theatre and arts centre, The Stables, at their home in Buckinghamshire. In its performance programme and education schemes it formed—and still forms—an embodiment of the pair’s creed that “all music” matters. Only quality, not genre, counts. Dame Cleo told students to find their own style, as she had: “Don’t ever copy.”She became Dame Cleo in 1997. Well into the 21st century that smoky, sultry contralto still beguiled, even if the topmost notes now edged down a rung or two. Dankworth died in 2010, but Dame Cleo announced his death only after that evening’s performance at The Stables. The show, as always, went on. In his memory she sang Sonnet 18—“Shall I compare thee to a summer’s day?”—from the Shakespeare album. Listen to that track and you hear her voice climb thrillingly at the line’s end, as she vows that “Thy eternal summer shall not fade.” Hers never did. ■For more on the latest books, films, TV shows, albums and controversies, sign up to Plot Twist, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter