Obituary - Tom Lehrer found matter worth roasting everywhere he looked

America’s best modern satirist died on July 26th, aged 97. When he suddenly stopped, and the output dropped, he was presumed dead. No, Tom Lehrer replied. Just having fun commuting between the coasts, teaching maths for a quarter of the year, ie the winter, at the University of California in sunny Santa Cruz, and spending the rest of the time in Cambridge, Massachusetts, being lazy. Never having to shovel snow; never having to see snow. And, being said to be dead, avoiding junk mail.Yet how famous he had been in the 1950s and most of the 1960s! He had sold his entire first song collection, recorded and mailed out by himself, and about half a million of those that came afterwards. The word spread like herpes. One album reached No.18 on the Billboard chart. Oh fame! Oh accolades! He had toured the world and packed out Carnegie Hall. Yes, they really panted to see a clean-cut Harvard graduate in horn-rimmed glasses pounding at a piano and singing: sometimes stern, sometimes morose, but often joyose, as he twisted in the knife.Anything could be his victim; nothing was sacred. In his love songs lovers told the truth, begging for agility while they still had facility, and admitting “I will hate you, when you are old and gray”. Nostalgia for “My Home Town” was shredded when the son of the mayor was an arsonist and the lovely girl next door now charged a fee “for what she used to give for free”. “National Brotherhood Week” was a fine idea; everyone should love their neighbour, even him, though he was Jewish (“and everybody hates the Jews”):As for spring, everyone loved it; he did himself, dearly. Skittles and beer, sunshine, all right with the world, and he and his sweetheart walking out each Sunday, “Poisoning Pigeons in The Park”.Yet shadows fell across this pretty landscape. One was pollution, with “the halibuts and the sturgeons being wiped out by detergeons”. The other was war. World War III was as vivid in the 1950s as the world war just past. He had spent a brief time at Los Alamos, “where the scenery’s attractive and the air is radioactive”, doing not much. In 1955-57 he was at the National Security Agency, aka No Such Agency, to do his army service, having waited til the world was calm first. It could not stay calm for long. A soldier told his mom he was off to drop the Bomb, “so don’t wait up for me”, but reassured her he would return “when the war is over, an hour and a half from now”. The blessing of a nuclear war, however, was that everyone would burn, fry or bake together, so there would be no more grieving: “We Will All Go Together When We Go!”And go where? Any institution that thought it knew ought to market itself in a modern way. Hence his most controversial song, “The Vatican Rag”, set indeed to ragtime:He liked it when he touched a nerve; more so when he severed a limb. His audiences did not have to applaud or agree with him, just laugh at his songs. Though he campaigned for George McGovern, he was more universalist than of the political left. But as the left splintered in the early 1960s, and as Vietnam got too serious for his songs, it was harder to write. He disliked the grammatical sloppiness of the counter-culture, and even more their air of moral superiority. “We are the folksong army, every one of us cares. We all hate poverty, war and injustice, unlike the rest of you squares.” Rather than anger, his deepest emotion was chagrin.So he stopped, though with a flurry in the mid-1960s when he wrote songs for various TV shows. And he went back to being what he truly was, a studious mathematician let dangerously loose on a keyboard.His childhood had been a breeze of maths and music, with a preference for Broadway shows. He entered Harvard at 15 and graduated at 18, the sort of student who brought books of logical puzzles to dinner in hall, and, on the piano in his room, liked to play Rachmaninov with his left hand in one key and his right a semitone lower, making his friends grimace. He seemed bound for a glittering mathematical career, but then the songs erupted, written for friends but spreading by word of mouth, until he was famous. He wrote each one in a trice and performed, increasingly, in night clubs. By contrast his PhD, on the concept of the mode, vaguely occupied him for 15 years before he abandoned it.Maths still infiltrated his songs. In “New Math” he pilloried a modernised teaching system, “so very simple, that only a child can do it!” Another favourite skewered Nikolai Lobachevsky, the “inventor” of hyperbolic geometry, whose secret was “Plagiarise! Let no one else’s work evade your eyes!” Maths influenced the songs in subtler ways, too, appealing to his love of pattern, rhyming and making things fit. These too were puzzles to solve.Did he ever have hopes of extending the frontier of scientific knowledge? Noooooo, unless you counted his Gilbert & Sullivan setting of the entire periodic table. He would rather retract it, if anything. He still taught maths, along with musical theatre, and that was his career. He had never wanted attention from people applauding his singing in the dark. His solitary, strictly private life made him happy; to fame he was indifferent. In 2020 he told everyone they could help themselves to his song rights. As for him, he returned to his puzzle books, as if he had never strayed. ■