Culture - Can Test cricket survive a sticky wicket?

A journalist goes out to bat for the five-day format. FANS OF EVERY sport claim their passion is more than a game, but few argue it has an edifying social role. “Cricket? It civilises people,” purred Robert Mugabe, then Zimbabwe’s dictator, as he sought to use it to build “a nation of gentlemen”. Since its inception in 1877 Test cricket, the original multi-day format, has been associated with propriety and moral instruction.Much of that is the result of the sport’s origins in Victorian England, according to Tim Wigmore, a journalist (and occasional contributor to The Economist). In a comprehensive history of Test cricket, he explains how posh the game used to be. Matches played over five working afternoons put the sport out of reach of the working class. Those who played for a wage were “players”; those who did not were “gentlemen”.Today the format endures because of other qualities. It is a punishing game that requires skill, self-control and strategy. Mr Wigmore likens it to an epic novel that continues to draw in fresh readers. He spends pages expounding on batting techniques (such as the leg glance), but also the role of cricket in political protests (including against Mugabe’s regime). In that way, the book is a fitting tribute to Test cricket: like the format, it is a slow burn that periodically crackles into life.The biggest Tests can attract massive audiences: at least 90m people in India streamed this year’s first match against England. But many aficionados worry the format is being usurped by Twenty20 (T20), played in three and a half hours, which is increasingly popular. T20 leagues have been set up around the world, from America to Afghanistan. The Indian Premier League, the glitziest competition, trails only America’s National Football League and England’s Premier League in terms of revenue generated per match.The most pressing concern for Test cricket is participation. As T20 has become cricket’s global calling card, the five-day version remains an exclusive club. Entry has been limited to just 12 countries because of worries about competitiveness. But there is still a great disparity. The newest entrants, Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Ireland, have played just 78 matches over the past decade; India, England and Australia have played 261.Those countries—known as the “Big Three”—are home to the biggest fanbases and economies, which bring them lucrative broadcasting deals. The other teams do not sell enough tickets to make hosting Tests worth it: countries outside the Big Three lose, on average, $500,000 per series. Players from the West Indies regularly abscond from international duty to play more lucrative T20 tournaments.Yet existential concerns about Test cricket are not new. There has been handwringing about its future almost since its inception. In 1911 people worried that commercialisation risked polluting it. In the 1970s the rise of one-day internationals, another truncated format, made traditionalists choke on their strawberries.In some respects, the five-day format is better than ever. Many players are adopting the aggressive batting used in T20, improving the spectacle. Most still consider Tests the pinnacle of cricket, producing feats of endurance that T20 cannot. Even youngsters who watch T20 today may gravitate towards the longer version in time, just as those who listen to pop music can come to enjoy opera later in life.Nonetheless Mr Wigmore worries that the format is being “hollowed out” in many countries. He proposes a pooled Test fund that would compensate countries more fairly, and help prevent player flight to T20. The sport’s governing body is already changing tactics. In 2019 it launched the World Test Championship, turning every bilateral series into a qualifying event with a winner-takes-all final every two years. More recently, officials have mooted a tiered system with promotion and relegation as a way to infuse greater competition into the sport’s lower ranks. Creating a more level playing-field for the smaller nations would be much better than the current sticky wicket. ■For more on the latest books, films, TV shows, albums and controversies, sign up to Plot Twist, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter