By Invitation - Asylum systems should be fixed, not scrapped, says the UN’s refugee boss

That will benefit not only bona fide refugees but countries receiving numbers of economic migrants. THE ASYLUM and migration debate is emotive, divisive and highly politicised. The many critics of modern asylum systems claim they are failing. Some call for scrapping asylum altogether and jettisoning the UN’s Refugee Convention, which guarantees the right to seek safety abroad.Such calls are reckless and counterproductive. Scrapping the asylum system would not only deny lifesaving protection to those in need. It would also do little or nothing to improve the situation at the borders of receiving countries. The solution is to use asylum systems as they are meant to be: fully and effectively. Then many of the problems of congestion, delays, backlogs and false claims could be fixed. That would help restore public faith.Undoubtedly, the system is under great strain. The asylum pathway is overwhelmed. It is intended for people fleeing war, violence and human-rights abuse. But purely economic migrants see it as the only way to reach opportunities in richer countries. Numbers of economic migrants clog channels desperately needed by people whose lives, in their home country, are in real danger.Yet the principle of asylum, supported by the tenets of the convention, has saved countless lives. We should preserve and strengthen existing systems, not scrap them.There is much public disquiet over asylum. But there is also wide support for genuine asylum-seekers and refugees. In a worldwide Ipsos survey last year, 73% of respondents felt that “People should be able to take refuge in other countries, including in my country, to escape from war and persecution.” At the same time, 61% said “Most foreigners who want to get into my country as a refugee really aren’t refugees” but are driven, rather, by economic motivations. Empathy and scepticism collide. So how can asylum systems work better?Public demands for robust border controls and orderly administration are reasonable. As an urgent first step, governments should resource, bolster and streamline asylum systems. If claims are dealt with fairly and swiftly, with failed asylum-seekers sent straight home, migrants will have less incentive to try the asylum route, which must be reserved for those who genuinely need it. A practical step is to adopt simplified procedures that more quickly weed out unfounded cases. When Switzerland brought in a process for dealing with nationalities whose claims were unlikely to succeed, claims from those groups fell by half in 18 months.In many countries, returns systems for failed asylum-seekers are ineffective and underfunded. Some countries are considering return hubs for failed claimants, while others are exploring arrangements with safe third countries to transfer refugees and asylum-seekers. Such deals have certainly been controversial: think Britain and Rwanda. But with proper safeguards in place, they can be both practical and lawful. Transfers must guarantee essential rights that ensure safety, access to fair and efficient asylum assessments, and dignified conditions. The transferring state has obligations too, such as offering financial support and more pathways for resettlement.Other measures could include stepping up search, rescue and disembarkation efforts along particularly deadly routes, such as in the Mediterranean Sea. And some asylum claims for Europe could be processed outside the EU—lessening chances for non-genuine claimants to disappear in search of work.It is also time to design a controlled, safe and orderly migration system to meet Europe’s high demand for migrant labour. Migrant workers’ economic contribution to the countries in which they work is well-known. Less publicised is how much refugees contribute to their host countries’ economy. A study in Poland found that refugees generate 2.7% of the country’s GDP. Contributions on this scale are a powerful argument for letting refugees work. In too many countries they are forbidden to do so.Safe and managed pathways have another benefit: they choke off the billions made by criminal gangs and people-smugglers—traffickers in death. Over the past decade 34,000 people trying to reach Europe by sea are reported to have died or gone missing. The true figure is surely much higher.Yet though sea-crossings dominate the news, most refugees want to stay near their home country. Of 31m refugees under UNHCR’s mandate, two-thirds live in countries neighbouring their own. Nearly three-quarters reside in low- or middle-income countries, such as Bangladesh, Chad, Iran, Turkey and Uganda.Despite that, humanitarian and development funding, already inadequate, has plummeted by at least a third this year. Food assistance, basic shelter, child protection, health, education and protection for women and girls at risk of violence, including horrendous sexual violence, are all being curtailed. Not only are refugees affected; the impact of cuts is also felt in host communities.For refugees to remain close to home, as so many wish, hosting states badly need support from wealthier ones so that refugees can work, go to school and lead safe, ordinary lives. That will help stabilise populations and regions.Handling this issue well through strong leadership and political will is as vital to Europe’s security as is investing in defence. The continent faces a belt of crises from northern Africa through the Middle East to Ukraine. Slashing humanitarian and development spending further could prove a major strategic miscalculation. It could undermine stability, fuel further displacement and only amplify wealthier countries’ sense of a border crisis. The tools exist to protect refugees, support host countries, manage migration and offer people opportunity. We must use them wisely, not throw them away.■Filippo Grandi is the UN High Commissioner for Refugees.