Letters - What many in the asylum and migration policy world think

Also this week, artificial intelligence and consulting, the British and hot weather, conference panels. Letters are welcome via email to letters@economist.comFind out more about how we process your letterThe Economist should be congratulated for having formulated out loud what many in the asylum and migration policy world think (“Scrap the asylum system”, July 12th). As you say, we should build something better. The 1951 UN refugee convention was conceived during the cold war in a European context. Today, although most countries have adhered to that agreement it is clear that the blanket concept of asylum does not work. The answer is for governments to declare the convention dead and replace it with regional conventions in Europe, Africa, the Middle East and so on. Asylum and migration would be processed through regional mechanisms with no request entertained by applicants outside their region. Countries that refused to take back their citizens would be subject to serious penalties.The International Organisation for Migration and the office for the UN High Commissioner for Refugees should be merged. The current mandate of the UNHCR to recognise “refugees” should be abolished and the staffing of the two bodies, which currently numbers 40,000, should be capped at one-third of that number. None of this will ever happen if governments don’t take things decisively in hand.Dr Alexander CasellaFormer UNHCR director for AsiaChêne-Bougeries, SwitzerlandYou rightly highlighted those countries that shirk their refugee obligations. Some countries want to externalise asylum processing and returns to a third country, but that risks deepening those failures. My forthcoming study reveals those risks. For instance, transfers can occur to “safe” countries where human-rights abuse is commonplace; perfunctory processing happens in detention without legal aid; and migrants are left in legal limbo in countries unable to provide basic assistance. These hazards cannot be brushed aside for political expediency. Although externalisation is not necessarily in violation of international law, states must proceed with great caution.You also correctly linked conflict and inequality to displacement and showed that restrictive mobility fuels irregular routes. True reform demands that wealthier countries tackle human-rights abuses and global inequality and expand safe, legal pathways. Pursuing assistance closer to home is legitimate, but co-operation should focus on building resilient asylum and reception systems, rather than on tools for border policing that can only exacerbate abuse.Most refugees already find shelter in poorer countries, as you pointed out in your briefing, “Wretched, refused” (July 12th). It is a false premise in the West that a few thousand arrivals justifies abdicating responsibility. We must avoid triggering a domino effect that could put asylum protections into question everywhere.Michael O’FlahertyCommissioner for human rightsCouncil of EuropeStrasbourgCharlemagne’s column on immigration in Denmark (July 12th) offered a timely perspective, but overlooked a new government agreement on international recruitment that deserves scrutiny.The deal opens the door to more foreign workers in low-wage sectors such as cleaning and hospitality, a pragmatic response to labour shortages. But the list of eligible countries excludes all of Africa, and includes countries like America, Japan and Moldova. The integration minister has stated that it is better to receive labour from Britain than from Somalia, a judgment based not on qualifications, but on cultural assumptions.Denmark says it believes in equal opportunity. Yet under this system, a nurse from Ghana or a hotel worker from Uganda is automatically excluded, not because of skills, but because of origin.Kurt NielsenBoard memberUnited Nations Association of DenmarkAarhus, DenmarkMore letters on this issue are available at: economist.com/letters/refugeesYou rightly acknowledge that the Afghan data leak in Britain raises important questions about the balance between national security, transparency and democratic scrutiny (“An Afghan super-malfunction”, July 19th). And as you say, “The desire to stop the dissemination of information that could endanger lives is understandable.”Much of the analysis, and not a little finger-pointing, has focused on the decision to cover up the leak of the names of Afghans who had helped the British army against the Taliban. But we need also to understand how, again without any form of democratic scrutiny, we ended up with a liability to evacuate tens of thousands of Afghan security personnel and their families. I think it was right to evacuate them, but that does not foreclose the question as to why.That is because these Afghans, unlike the interpreters and other locally employed civilians, were not employed directly by us. Instead they were specialists. Counter-narcotics’ forces, police commandos and intelligence operatives, trained, mentored and supported by our special forces and agencies. However, this tended to mean they were controlled in our distinct, need-to-know silos, so that no one, as far as I can judge, had a full purview, let alone anything approaching command and control. The result was made clear during the chaos of Operation Pitting in August 2021, when an evacuation planned for up to 3,000 people became 15,000, which still left, as we have subsequently discovered, some 30,000 other potential evacuees.How did we get to that point? In my view, after 2014 and the end of combat operations, Whitehall took its eye off the ball. To be fair, other crises intervened, whether Brexit, covid-19, or Russia’s invasion of Crimea. But if you ask a fundamental question about who, in Whitehall, owned Afghanistan in that era, you would struggle to find an adequate answer. That is where we need to start our inquiry.Simon DigginsColonel (retired)Defence attaché, Kabul, 2008-10Rickmansworth, Hertfordshire“Will AI take out Accenture?”, Schumpeter asked (June 28th), as he rightly questioned the expanding role of consultants. Yet there is a far more dangerous trend. Corporate gatekeepers are increasingly outsourcing their judgment rather than strengthening their oversight. This isn’t just a strategic misstep, it’s a fundamental governance failure.My research on board oversight of financial disclosures shows how reporting that is driven by artificial intelligence can obscure poor performance when directors and audit committees lack the tools, or the will, to ask critical questions. I have created indices to detect when firms write for algorithms, not investors. The risks are real, and they are mounting.The broader lesson, painfully familiar in Israel after October 7th 2023, is that systems fail when those charged with oversight fall asleep at the wheel, whether in national security or corporate governance. AI adoption is no excuse for disengaged leadership. Boards must build internal capacity, demand transparency from vendors and subject strategic technologies to real scrutiny, not just marketing gloss.Dr Keren Bar-HavaHead of the Accounting DepartmentJerusalem School of BusinessHebrew UniversityJerusalemWorking with Accenture was the most awful experience of my 40-year career. Even when the project had utterly failed and its consultants were, to all intents and purposes, thrown out of the building, they assured me that they’d be back in three months as we couldn’t do without them. The company took the programme in-house, hired and trained offshore resources and delivered an 18-month, €105m ($122m) project only two weeks late, on budget and with zero launch failures.Lewis GrahamHitchin, HertfordshireThe heating of Britain’s climate is relatively new (Bagehot, July 5th). But the benighted madness of Englishmen in the face of the sun has a history that long predates the words immortalised in Noel Coward’s song. In South Africa the British are often referred to as rooineks, a disparaging term used by Afrikaners to describe Britons’ unprotected sun-reddened necks. British tourists are nicknamed gambas (prawns) by Spanish locals for their pink-hewed skin.More seriously, deaths from sun exposure are increasing. There were 17,500 new cases of melanoma a year and 2,300 deaths from 2017 to 2019. The incidence of the skin disease has risen by 31% in ten years. If Englishmen must go out in the midday sun they should slap on the sunscreen, whether in Brighton or Benalmádena.Dr David ColdwellWinchesterMy mother grew up in south Germany, where we have lived with the climate that Britain is now getting used to. There is a lack of knowledge in Britain about keeping buildings cool in the summer. Throughout the heatwave I saw open windows and doors. In Germany these remain closed during the heat as the houses have external shutters that keep them cool. Yet such shutters are hard to come by in Britain and you need planning permission in some cases, a good example of an inefficient market.That is a solution to coping with the heat that produces less carbon than air conditioning. Awnings and tree-lined roads that provide shade are other ideas.Sophie Candfield Public health doctorBirminghamI grew up in south-west London 70 years ago. I returned recently and it was shocking how little had changed. One reason that Britons find the heat difficult to bear is that many of them still live in technologically obsolete Victorian houses. Another reason is attitude. Britain is not a hot country by global standards. My son lives in Whitehorse in the Yukon, where temperatures during the year can vary between -400C and 300C. Few people complain. They dress appropriately and get on with life.Tony WoodruffBurnaby, CanadaBagehot argues that Britain is now a hot country but Britons don’t act like it. That may be true for the south-east, but not for a northern city like Newcastle. Geordies have long behaved as if they live in a tropical climate (Newcastle’s line of latitude is 55 degrees north). Just visit on a Saturday in winter. You’ll find yourself surrounded by people dressed in little more than beach attire enjoying a night out.Frederik OegemaDeventer, NetherlandsI’m sure Bartleby’s column on the rules of business conferences rang true for all the conference-panel warriors out there (June 28th). The best panel I ever witnessed had little to do with the blah, blah, blah. It was in Nigeria and the moderator, so proud of his expertise in tai chi, asked the panellists to join him in practising the flowing movements. Surprisingly, many did, with wobbles and laughter. It may not have been the most informative panel I’ve seen, but definitely the most entertaining. Too bad he did not start with this, it might have loosened things up and helped everyone to be more “unfiltered”.Lawrence HaddadExecutive directorGlobal Alliance for Improved NutritionBrighton