The world this week - Business

Donald Trump announced plans to relax regulations governing the development of artificial intelligence in America, including penalties for states with stern rules on deploying AI. Mr Trump aims to unify an increasingly fragmented legal landscape for AI among the 50 states, and to massively expand AI exports to America’s allies. The president also signed an order intended to root out ideological bias in AI models, or “woke Marxist lunacy”, as he described it.A report surfaced that OpenAI and SoftBank are at odds over the direction of the Stargate project, a $500bn AI investment that was announced in January with the support of Mr Trump. The companies are struggling to co-ordinate the construction of data centres. Countering the narrative, OpenAI said it had entered into an agreement with Oracle, another Stargate partner, to develop 4.5 gigawatts of data-centre capacity, though it did not say where or how it would be funded.Mr Trump described Jerome Powell as a “numbskull” and said he would be out of his job as chairman of the Federal Reserve within eight months. The president is waging a public war against the Fed for not cutting interest rates fast enough, though he said recently that he would not sack Mr Powell. Adding to the pressure, Scott Bessent, the treasury secretary, called on the central bank to “conduct an exhaustive internal review of its non-monetary policy operations”, accusing it of “mission creep”.The European Central Bank kept interest rates on hold, following a blistering pace of cuts over the past year. The headline annual rate of inflation is 2% in the euro area, which is the ECB’s medium-term target. The currency bloc’s inflation rate is lower than that of America, Britain and Japan.Alphabet’s quarterly net profit rose by 19%, year on year, and revenue from Google’s search and advertising business grew by 12%. That helped alleviate concerns from investors that AI chatbots are eating into its core search business, for now.Meanwhile, an AI system developed by Google’s DeepMind was awarded the “gold” standard at the International Mathematical Olympiad, an annual event where pre-university students compete to solve six exceptionally difficult maths problems. It was the first time an AI reached the top standard at the competition. OpenAI said it had notched up a similar score to DeepMind, though it did not officially enter the contest.Chevron sealed its $53bn acquisition of Hess, after winning a lengthy legal dispute that had delayed the takeover. Hess owns a big stake in Guyana’s fast-growing offshore oilfields, but ExxonMobil had challenged the takeover, claiming it held the rights to negotiate the stake with Hess. Exxon said it disagreed with the ruling by the Paris-based International Chamber of Commerce, but respected the arbitration process. Earlier, the Federal Trade Commission lifted its ban on John Hess, the chief executive of Hess, joining Chevron’s board of directors.UniCredit, one of Italy’s biggest banks, withdrew its hostile takeover bid for Banco BPM, a smaller rival, and criticised the government for trying to block the deal. The European Commission has also chastised the government for meddling in the takeover process.Elon Musk warned of a “few rough quarters” ahead for Tesla, as the carmaker reported a big drop in sales and net profit. Mr Musk pointed to the loss of incentives in America to buy electric vehicles as one source of Tesla’s troubles. A $7,500 federal tax credit for EV purchases ends in September. The company did not update its outlook, saying it was “difficult to measure the impacts of shifting global trade.”General Motors’ profit plunged in the second quarter, as it took a $1.1bn charge related to the cost of tariffs imposed on cars imported from its factories in South Korea, Mexico and elsewhere. The company said it expects those costs to abate in coming months. Meanwhile, Stellantis recorded a net loss for the first half of the year, mostly because of charges related to its business, but also because of a €300m ($350m) hit incurred from tariffs.Coca-Cola registered another decline in North American sales of its trademark drink, as health-conscious Americans seek alternatives to soda. The company is introducing a new version of Coca-Cola made with cane sugar, a change that was trailed by Mr Trump a week ago. Some people think cane sugar is healthier than high-fructose corn syrup, which has been used to sweeten Coke for decades. Both versions will be available.Michael O’Leary, the boss of Ryanair, Europe’s biggest airline, raised the possibility of switching the registration of new Boeing aircraft deliveries to Britain to ensure it avoids the cost of potential tariffs from the EU. Ryanair is based in Ireland, an EU member; the bloc is considering stiff duties on Boeing planes delivered to the region if it can’t reach a trade deal with America. 