The Americas - A new paradise for crypto

Amid monetary mayhem in Venezuela digital finance is booming and may threaten the regime. In Ian Fleming’s 1961 novel, “Thunderball”, Ernst Stavro Blofeld, James Bond’s archenemy, considers the bolívar, along with the Swiss franc, to be the “hardest” of all the world’s currencies, an ideal store of value for the takings of his criminal enterprise. This fictional depiction accurately reflected contemporary economics. Between 1950 and 1980, Venezuela had the lowest rate of inflation in the world.How times have changed. Over the past 25 years, under breathtaking economic mismanagement, first by Hugo Chávez, who became president in 1999, then under Nicolás Maduro, who took over from his late socialist mentor in 2013, the country that is blessed with the world’s largest proven oil reserves has seen its currency crash more spectacularly than did the Weimar Republic’s papiermark in the 1920s (see chart). A total of 14 zeros have been removed from Venezuelan banknotes since 2007. Blofeld’s bolívars are worth one-trillionth of 1% of what he paid for them.There was some respite as the current decade began. In 2019 inflation had reached eye-popping levels, and prices were tripling every month. Facing its possible demise, the regime, whose main expertise is in its own survival, finally saw sense. That year, it allowed informal use of the dollar and lifted import restrictions as part of a package of economic reforms. That helped stabilise the economy.But this year the bolívar has begun to slip again. As of July 22nd the official rate was down 56% against the dollar. The black-market rate is 30% lower still. Bank of America thinks inflation will hit 530% for 2025. “Completely false”, says the regime. A shortage of dollars may be playing a role, after the Trump administration allowed the licence of an American oil giant, Chevron, to operate in Venezuela to lapse on May 27th. “Chevron was the most important supplier of dollars to the private companies in the Venezuelan foreign-exchange market,” says Francisco Monaldi of Rice University in Houston.Mr Maduro’s response has been to muffle the messengers. In June the regime arrested several economists and consultants who had been tracking inflation and exchange rates, including Rodrigo Cabezas, a finance minister under Chávez. (He was released on July 23rd.) In May the government arrested 20 people who it said were associated with Monitor Dólar, a website which published black-market rates. The site is now offline.But the messages persist and the bolívar continues to slump. Some are reminded of 2016-19, when hyperinflation raged, pensions and state salaries became worthless, and shops and companies went bust as the cost of supplies outstripped customers’ ability to pay. “It’s really tough” says Liliana, an accountant in Caracas, the capital. “We might go back to that era where many businesses closed and people left.”But one thing has changed since 2019. Then, cash was king. Card payments were functionally useless because banks were still accounting using the official exchange rate, meaning spending limits became minuscule. “Going out to dinner you felt like a drug dealer, with bricks of banknotes in every pocket,” recalls a diplomat who was posted to Caracas at the time.Today, the black market for currency is online. Mobile-phone applications of uncertain jurisdiction such as Binance and Airtm let users exchange almost any currency, fiat or crypto, between themselves, at rates set by an active market. Businesses often use these platforms to rid themselves of bolívars as soon as they receive any, before the currency’s value slides again.These new digital markets help some Venezuelans cope with the returning scourge of inflation. And they are beyond the regime’s control. ■Sign up to El Boletín, our subscriber-only newsletter on Latin America, to understand the forces shaping a fascinating and complex region.