United States - Cuts to food stamps are about to hit in America

One in five people in New Mexico receive the benefit. BY DAYBREAK in Santa Fe, the line of cars already snakes down the street. Families in sedans, builders in trucks and one off-duty taxi queue up to get frozen chicken, a sack of potatoes and a gallon of milk. Everyone in line at the Food Depot, a food bank, gets served, but one couple in their 50s arrived at 5:20am just to be sure. They receive money for food through the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Programme (SNAP), a federal welfare programme. It lasts them five days.Cuts to SNAP are coming. The One Big Beautiful Bill reduces federal spending on the programme by 15% by 2034. One in five New Mexicans uses SNAP—the highest rate in America. The state reckons that it is set to lose somewhere between $224m and $352m in federal funding in the first year alone. Almost 60,000 New Mexicans are likely to become ineligible for support. The federal Department of Agriculture, which due to a quirk of history is responsible for SNAP, has defended the cuts, saying it is “attempting to right size the programme”. Some wonks warn that the cuts are so steep that some states might eventually withdraw from the programme altogether.SNAP has unusual visibility for a safety-net scheme. Formerly known as food stamps, the programme has roots in a New Deal plan to redirect crop surpluses. Its subsequent survival owes much to cynicism about cash-benefits. It has become comparatively more important as other welfare programmes withered. Generally, SNAP is available to those at or below 130% of the federal poverty line, around $3,400 per month for a family of four. About 42m Americans use the programme (see chart 1). The scheme has benefits: one study found that those on SNAP had $1,400 less per year in medical costs. Young children who receive SNAP live longer, earn more and stay out of jail at greater rates than those who do not.But, as Glenn Thompson, chair of the House of Representatives’ Committee on Agriculture, has noted, the costs have “balloon[ed]”. Between 2019 and 2024 SNAP grew from $60bn a year to $100bn. Uptake rose during the pandemic, as lots of states tried to sign up as many people as possible. Many of those people have stuck around since (see chart 2). Cost per person has gone up too: first due to a temporary pandemic-era boost and then due to food-price inflation. But there was also a bigger change: for the first time since 1975, the amount of the benefit grew to reflect the changing cost of a healthy diet. Payments went up by a fifth, although SNAP still allocates just $6 a day for food.The mega-bill is not resetting the programme to its 2019 level, however. SNAP will undergo a series of changes, including increased work requirements and cutting off lawful immigrants. The biggest change is to make states chip in. Previously, the federal government paid for all SNAP benefits, ensuring that even poor people in poor states received support. Now “states will have some skin in the game”, says Kevin Corinth of the American Enterprise Institute, a free-market think-tank.From 2028, the amount states will pay will be based on the amount of SNAP payments they disburse incorrectly, known as the error rate, on a sliding scale. Those with a low-enough rate can avoid paying entirely, while those that send more than 10% of payments incorrectly will have to pay for 15% of benefits. The national average is 11%—just eight states are sufficiently frugal to avoid any of the cost sharing.Administrators in New Mexico have a detailed plan to cut mistakes, through prosaic things like improving applicant interviews. Luckily the state has a reprieve: an 11th-hour change to the law gives states with the highest error rates more time before cost-sharing kicks in (perhaps not coincidentally, Alaska, represented by swing-vote Senator Lisa Murkowski, has the highest rate in the country). States have limited options if they cannot reduce mistakes. The law stops them from reducing benefit amounts, or cutting off certain groups. Given that almost all states are required by their constitutions to balance their budgets, they have to either redirect spending, raise taxes or reduce SNAP rolls by making it harder to apply.What if there is a recession? “You get a huge budget crunch,” says Robert Greenstein of the Brookings Institution, another think-tank. “You could actually see a number of states completely terminating the programme, even as need increases.” ■Stay on top of American politics with The US in brief, our daily newsletter with fast analysis of the most important political news, and Checks and Balance, a weekly note from our Lexington columnist that examines the state of American democracy and the issues that matter to voters.