United States - The year of the women’s-sports bar

Fed up with the traditional joints, these businesswomen are shooting their shot. THE HUM is nothing unusual. Talking heads on the televisions comment on the last play of the game and fans woot when the players hit big shots. But there are signs that it’s not your normal sports bar. The menu features both bulgogi beef tacos and “Girl Dinner”, a charcuterie board with dried apricots and olives. Instead of Heineken and tequila sodas the drink offerings include the “Sporty Spice Margarita”, the “9-to-5” espresso martini and the “Red Card”, a chilled fireball shot. The clientele is conspicuously lacking in Y chromosomes. So are the athletes on the screens. This is Jolene Jolene, a women’s-sports bar.Chelsea Fishman, its owner, opened Jolene Jolene in Atlanta on July 4th. That weekend 500 people came. The bar is a place for anyone who is tired of asking bartenders to change the channel to a women’s game, she says. On a recent evening the bar was bubbling. “We’ve been wanting this for as long as we can remember,” says a former college-basketball point guard, eating wings.Jolene Jolene is among the first women’s-sports bars. The movement started when Jenny Nguyen, a chef and basketball aficionado, founded The Sports Bra in Portland, Oregon, in 2022. Her niche is quickly becoming less niche: there are now about ten women’s-sports bars. Over a dozen more—Babes, The Final Period and Tomboys, to name a few—are raising funds, renting spaces and finalising booze lists. The entrepreneurs, who tend to be first-time businesswomen, share tips and frustrations on a group chat that adds members each week.The bars are opening in part because the games they screen are more popular than ever. Deloitte, a consulting firm, estimates that women’s sports will generate $2.4bn in global revenue this year, up from $981m in 2023. Many attribute the change to the women’s national soccer team and to Caitlin Clark, a basketball player who smashed records at the University of Iowa, then became last year’s top pick for the Women’s National Basketball Association (WNBA). The 2024 college-championship game that she played in drew 24m viewers in its final minutes, more than any college game ever had on ESPN, America’s biggest sports network. In May a WNBA team in San Francisco played its first game. Due to “surging demand”, the league plans to add five more teams.At Jolene Jolene fans need not fear that televisions will switch away from a women’s game to show a men’s one. Ms Fishman is adamant that Jolene Jolene is a women’s-sports bar, not a bar just for women. When asked, its patrons say they are happy for men to join in too. But if women’s sports are to become truly mainstream, one says, then the NBA ought to rename itself the MNBA.■Stay on top of American politics with The US in brief, our daily newsletter with fast analysis of the most important political news, and Checks and Balance, a weekly note from our Lexington columnist that examines the state of American democracy and the issues that matter to voters.