Middle East & Africa - Ugandan intervention in Congo risks stoking ethnic violence

It may also cement Rwanda’s hold over its neighbour. NEAR A HILLTOP village of thatched huts and purple cassava fields, young men with Kalashnikovs stand guard by a dirt road. Though the mood is relaxed, the checkpoint in Ituri province in the east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a reminder that the whole region is racked by violence. Since 2017, militias linked to two of Ituri’s main ethnic groups, the Hema and the Lendu, have battled over access to land, livestock and gold mines, forcing more than 1m people in Ituri to flee their homes. Some 100,000 were displaced between January and March alone.The conflict has received less attention than the fighting farther south, where rebels from the M23 militia, supported by Rwanda, captured territory earlier this year. Yet M23’s campaign has also affected Ituri. According to a UN report released on July 22nd, Uganda, alarmed by the group’s advance, has increased its military presence in eastern Congo (see map). Because Uganda is on the side of the Hema, conflict in Ituri may be stoked.On the face of it, Uganda’s intervention in eastern Congo is less controversial than that of M23 and Rwanda. The government in Kinshasa has condemned M23’s advance farther south as an invasion. A peace deal with Rwanda in June and an agreement with M23 on July 19th are supposed to restore Congolese control over the area.Congo first invited Ugandan troops in 2021 to help it fight jihadists affiliated with Islamic State (IS). General Muhoozi Kainerugaba, Uganda’s army chief (and a son of the president), flew to Kinshasa in June for a meeting that officially expanded that operation to Ituri. In public, Congolese officials play up Uganda’s role as an important security partner. In practice, the Congolese government probably had little choice but to accept Uganda’s decision to send more troops earlier this year.Ituri is rich in gold, much of it smuggled out through Uganda. It also has oil and gas deposits that Uganda is exploiting from its side of the border. Following M23’s advance in February in North and South Kivu, south of Ituri, Uganda has increased its deployment to around 6,000 troops to protect its interests in the wider region, without asking Congo’s permission, according to UN security officials and the UN report’s authors. “They consider this their backyard,” says a UN official. “Because Congo has become so weak, Congo has allowed them to do this.”Some in Ituri welcome the Ugandan intervention, saying the relatively well-trained troops could help restore order to an area where civilians are frequently caught up in attacks by militias. “They can bring peace if—and only if—they are impartial,” says Kudra, a university student in Bunia, the provincial capital. “We’re in a very sensitive and sectarian province.”Yet they might just as easily do the opposite. General Muhoozi has said his troops will defend the Hema in Ituri and target the Co-operative for the Development of Congo, a militia that claims to protect the Lendu. “No one on this earth can kill my people and think he will not suffer for it,” he wrote in February. Uganda is also quietly backing a new armed group that is being recruited from among the Hema, says the UN report.Beyond stirring up trouble in Ituri, the Ugandan deployment could end up cementing M23’s hold over the parts of eastern Congo that the government in Kinshasa wants it to relinquish. General Muhoozi, in particular, is friendly with Rwanda. He has praised the M23 rebels and Paul Kagame, Rwanda’s dictator, on social media.On July 9th Uganda reopened a border crossing into M23-held territory in North Kivu province, saying that closing it had been “criminal and counterproductive”. In the past, competing Ugandan and Rwandan interests in eastern Congo have escalated into fighting between the two. For now, they appear to be lining up against their neighbour. ■Sign up to the Analysing Africa, a weekly newsletter that keeps you in the loop about the world’s youngest—and least understood—continent.