Asia - “Gated communities” are flourishing in India

But they are not quite the havens its elites had in mind. In the old mill lands of Mumbai, along the avenues of the new city of Gurugram, abutting the tech campuses of Bangalore and on the edges of most other big Indian metropolises rise clusters of awesome towers with names such as Imperia, Opulus and Pinnacle. Inside are worlds of quiet luxury: gyms with personal trainers, multiple pools and spas, private cinemas, acres of gardens and, to satisfy residents’ metaphysical needs, meditation areas and temples.India can be a difficult place to live, with its pollution, noise and chaos. Yet even the richest stay put. This year some 3,500 Indian millionaires are expected to emigrate, according to data from Henley and Partners, an outfit that helps them acquire foreign passports. But that is a small fraction of the country’s roughly 850,000 dollar millionaires, and the millions more just below that threshold. Uprooting yourself from your home and your loved ones is a wrenching business, even for the rich.But what if you could leave without leaving? That is the promise of the towers sprouting across the country, known as “gated communities”: a rich-world lifestyle with poor-world benefits. At last count in 2021, these kinds of ritzy developments hosted 16m households in India’s 50 biggest cities, according to Redseer, a consultancy. By 2031, the number may double.Consider the attractions: in London, a rich Indian émigré might still have to wheel his own suitcase up his driveway. If he lives at a fancy tower in Mumbai, however, an “elite white-glove” valet may do the job for him. “Ultra-luxury” homes such as these accounted for around a fifth of all new developments launched in first-tier cities in the first three months of this year, according to Anarock, a research firm. Developments classed as “luxury” or “high-end”—featuring merely a single pool, say—made up a further half of them.Cynics might detect another lure: a desire to preserve the highly stratified society that India is supposed to be casting off. Entry to many of these enclaves is controlled by an army of security guards (visitors are increasingly required to supply a one-time password). Staff and people delivering things are often directed to use separate lifts. Many Hindu-run complexes explicitly or implicitly prevent Muslims from moving in. Such policies eerily echo the caste- and religion-based segregation that has shaped India for centuries.Residents of these communities pay a pretty penny, but they impose costs on outsiders, too. As developers chase juicy margins from luxury homes, fewer affordable ones get built (these make up less than 15% of recent launches, according to Anarock’s count). And India’s urban planners struggle to manage knock-on effects. Big developments often secure their water supplies by drilling deep wells, which depletes groundwater for everyone. They build their own parks and playgrounds, replicating private squares in London’s Mayfair and Belgravia.By walling themselves away, India’s rich secede from society. If the elites don’t use public services, there is less pressure on the state to improve them. Public education and health care are already of such poor quality it would be unthinkable for a middle-class family to use them. Civic disengagement in India is widespread. Last year the statistics ministry complained that Indians in posh apartment buildings refused to respond to surveys—one reason official data in India is wretched.Is enclave living all it is cracked up to be? No matter how hard the rich try to escape India, India has a way of finding them. Security guards cannot keep out air pollution. Households seeking space for their second, third and fourth cars have made posh estates’ car parks as jammed as urban roads.Corruption festers within high walls, just as it does outside them. Law firms offer advice on dealing with badly behaved residents’ associations (some get accused of embezzling management fees or overcharging for services). Residents’ WhatsApp groups hum with discontent. Neighbours fight over etiquette for dog-walkers, or where Ubers may drop them off. These online forums are good venues for spreading dissatisfaction, but not for finding solutions.A poor man in the street might take some solace from tower-dwellers’ tribulations. Alongside Schadenfreude, a more sobering thought might emerge. If the country’s elites cannot resolve their headaches—even with money and walls and white-gloved valets—what hope is there for anyone else?■Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.