Asia - The new private jet pecking order

In oligarchic aviation China has just fallen behind India. Life for Asia’s super-rich has its ups and downs. One industry, more than any other, provides a bird’s-eye view on their fortunes: the mind-boggling market for private jets. In recent years the number of posh private aircraft registered in China has dropped like a stone, in part because the Communist Party has taken umbrage against lavish displays of wealth. These days it is India’s rising rich who are snapping up sleek personal planes.Private jet-makers have long gambled that Asia will deliver an outsize chunk of future growth. By one estimate, the value of private-jet sales in the continent will swell 7% a year to 2030. That compares with 4% annual growth worldwide and a mere 1% in America (already home to two-thirds of the world’s private-jet fleet).For years it was Chinese demand that made brokers in the region rich. Chinese tycoons took to the skies in droves during the go-go years of the 2000s and 2010s. Their country still has more private jets than any of its neighbours, yet the lead has been dwindling. Between 2021 and 2024 the size of China’s fleet shrunk by a whopping one-quarter, to 249 jets, according to Asian Sky Group (ASG), a business-jet broker and consultancy.Zero-covid rules preventing travel may have encouraged some of the jet junking. More important: Chinese magnates lost money to a property crash and to crackdowns by a ruling party that thinks entrepreneurs are too big for their boots. The number of dollar billionaires in China peaked at about 1,185 in 2021 (37% of the global total). Since then, the number has fallen by one-third.A few years ago the Chinese government relaunched hoary campaigns that aim to stop party members, and anyone else with a public profile, behaving in ways that could be deemed extravagant. That has gone as far as banning alcohol at government functions and lambasting excessive flora in meeting rooms. Thus even people with lots of cash now worry about being seen spending it.Hop across the Himalayas, however, and one finds a very different mood. Between 2020 and 2024 the number of private jets registered in India jumped by nearly a quarter to 168. The number of monthly private flights tripled to more than 2,400, higher than anywhere else on the continent). In the year to March 2025, four of the ten most popular private-jet routes in Asia were domestic Indian ones, connecting Mumbai to Delhi, Bangalore, Ahmedabad and Pune (a mere four-hour drive away). None of the busiest routes began or ended at a Chinese airport.The good times in India started in 2021, says Vinod Singel, who back then was selling planes for Bombardier, a Canadian aircraft-maker. “That’s when I saw the real boom.” Private-jet firms once treated India as an afterthought. Now they organise polo matches to woo customers.“A whole new wave” of super-rich customers has joined the market, says Nitin Sarin, a lawyer in aviation finance. “When I started out it was just the big boys” who bought private jets, he says, such as the people running India’s richest conglomerates. Now buyers come from construction, jewellery, pharmaceuticals and education. Many are from second- and third-tier cities. They “are done buying their Maybachs and Rolls-Royces”, says Mr Sarin.High-flying Indians differ from their Chinese peers in the jets they buy. In China the market is a lot about “showing off”, says Dennis Lau of ASG. The thinking is: “[I can’t] turn up to my golf game in a jet that’s smaller than my competitor.” So Chinese buyers lean towards high-end aircraft that can go long distances, even if that is more than they require.Indians more often buy practical models, and use their planes more intensively. In China it is easy to cover shortish distances on the ground using high-speed rail or pristine new highways. That is not at all the case in India. As for commercial flights, schedules in India are not yet deep enough to permit day-tripping to the small cities and factory sites that tycoons sometimes visit. Besides, “it’s not easy to fly commercially,” says Rohit Kapur, a broker and former president of the Business Aircraft Operators Association. “Try going into a lounge anywhere in India. There’s a queue of 500 people with their credit cards.”Rich Indians are fiercer negotiators than their Chinese peers, brokers say. One tells of a colleague who met a Chinese client at a golf club in order to clinch the sale of a $65m jet. The buyer’s friend came by and decided on the spot to buy the same aircraft. In India, by contrast, even “top-level clients” haggle down to the last $5,000 on a $100m jet, says the broker: “Nobody splurges here.”This hard-nosed bargaining looks a bit more reasonable once all the costs of ownership are totted up. Private jets go for between $3m and $100m, depending on their size, range and age. Taxes on them run at 28% (though most Indian buyers charter them out sometimes, which cuts the levy to 5%). For a $10m jet, fixed annual costs run at $1m-1.5m, not including charges for fuel, parking and landing fees.If the market keeps growing, ordinary Indians will soon also get saddled with some of the costs. Private flights produce far more emissions per passenger than the commercial kind. They also jam up busy airports. India lacks small airfields of the kind other countries use for private jets. It has only about 300 airfields in total, compared with 16,000 in America.As the number of airports grows—a government priority—so will the number of jets. Private charter services aimed at less pecunious millionaires are getting more common. The industry could expand swiftly using innovative business models borrowed from the West, such as on-demand aircraft charters and timeshares.The Indian market does not seem hostage to the sort of government meddling that has lately weighed down planes in China. The main thing that could clip its wings, then, is a big economic downturn. If that happens, the super-rich—like everyone else—might just have to make some wrenching adjustments. In a recession, warns Mr Kapur, company jets “will be the first thing to go”. ■Stay on top of our India coverage by signing up to Essential India, our free weekly newsletter.