China - The looming deadline for the Panama Canal ports deal

China will approve their sale. But there’s a huge catch. Two ports, one at either end of the Panama canal, have become a battlefront in the power struggle between China and America. Both countries view them as vital to their trading and security interests. By July 27th talks were supposed to wrap up on the terms of a $23bn deal that would see ownership of their terminals, as well as those in 41 other ports in 22 other countries around the world, handed from CK Hutchison (CKH), a Hong Kong-based conglomerate, to two Western firms: BlackRock, an American investment company, and MSC, a Swiss-Italian shipping giant. But China has stuck its oar in.Soon after the proposed deal was announced on March 4th, China’s anger became clear. Through Communist Party-controlled newspapers in Hong Kong, it launched tirades against CKH and its owner, Li Ka-shing, accusing them of caving in to pressure from President Donald Trump, who portrays CKH as beholden to the Chinese. “China is operating the Panama Canal and we didn’t give it to China, we gave it to Panama, and we’re taking it back,” he said at his inauguration on January 20th.In late March China launched an investigation into whether the sale would violate its anti-monopoly rules. Its aim was to block the transaction. Now it is suggesting another approach. According to the Wall Street Journal, China says the deal can go ahead as long as COSCO, a Chinese state-owned shipping behemoth, can join the buyers. Bloomberg writes that COSCO wants veto rights in the ports’ operations. CKH, BlackRock and MSC are reportedly amenable to COSCO’s participation. But this is hardly likely to please Mr Trump. For all his anxieties about CKH, it is not directly under the party’s thumb. Indeed, Mr Li has had a difficult relationship with leaders in Beijing since he began selling off assets on the mainland more than a decade ago. COSCO, however, is closely tied to the party. It controls the appointment of the firm’s most senior bosses, who also run its party committee.CKH could risk China’s wrath by refusing COSCO’s involvement. That would jeopardise CKH’s business interests in China (including in Hong Kong), which last year accounted for about 12% of the firm’s $61bn of total revenue. According to Bloomberg, China has already told its state-owned enterprises not to engage in new deals with Li family members. Its frostiness has stalled efforts by Mr Li’s younger son, Richard Li, to expand his insurance business on the mainland, the news service says. But overall, since the proposed sale was announced, CKH’s share price has risen by more than 30%.CKH and the Western firms could infuriate Mr Trump by agreeing to China’s demands. His focus may be on Panama, but other countries where the ports are located, including Belgium, Britain, Germany, the Netherlands and Spain, may have to approve the deals. American officials would not take kindly to allies allowing COSCO big stakes in port operations. In 2019, citing national security, the American government forced a Hong Kong company to give up its ownership of a container terminal in Long Beach, California, following the firm’s takeover by COSCO.Allies share some of America’s concerns. COSCO gained a big foothold in Europe in 2009 when it began managing terminals in the port of Piraeus in Greece, a member of NATO and the EU. In 2016 it gained a majority share of the entire facility. But the EU became more wary. In 2021, when the firm sought a 35% stake in a terminal at the port of Hamburg in Germany, there was an outcry. Many Germans expressed fears that China could use COSCO to disrupt the port and spy on its operations. In the end COSCO was allowed a stake, but smaller than the 25% needed for a veto over big decisions.So the imminent deadline for wrapping up a deal involving the original parties looks like the start of yet more fraught discussions. A new date could be set. Or CKH could try to find a way of involving COSCO that America might accept (keeping the Chinese company out of Panama could help). Caught between the feuding powers, CKH has dangerous waters to navigate. ■Subscribers can sign up to Drum Tower, our new weekly newsletter, to understand what the world makes of China—and what China makes of the world.