Europe - Could Europe be the next big coffee producer?

While temperature changes threaten the coffee belt, some countries sense opportunity. JuaN GIRáLDEZ has waited for years to enjoy the fruits of his labour. This year his coffee plants, grown in the forested shade of northern Barcelona, will finally yield a few kilos of beans. It might not be much, he admits, but it was unthinkable a few decades ago. Thank climate change, and a lot of passion and hard work, he quips.The Arabica bean, which makes up the bulk of global production, should not be surviving in Catalonia’s continental climate. But Mr Giráldez’s plants can now withstand lows of 8°C and highs of 38°C. Climate change is tightening the geographical “coffee belt” that straddles the equator, exposing its biggest producers in South America, eastern Africa and South-East Asia to more drought and severe frosts. But it is also creating opportunities for its biggest consumers.Sicily, too, has seen its dreams of coffee production finally come true after more than a century. The Morettino family began experimenting with coffee plants in the 1990s in collaboration with the University of Palermo and the city’s botanical garden, but its efforts usually shrivelled in winter. Only recently has the family achieved bigger harvests, going from 30kg in 2021 to over 100kg last year. Sicily may be better known for its wine and olive oil, but maybe tomorrow it will be a “coffee land,” says Andrea Morettino, a fourth-generation roaster.It is not just coffee that might thrive in this new environment. Since the early 1970s and 1980s, higher temperatures have prompted European farmers to swap traditional citrus fruits for tropical ones. Today Spain is the largest producer of avocados and mangoes on the continent, but Italy is experimenting too. Since 2004 the number of hectares cultivated with avocados and mangoes in Italy has jumped from just ten to 1,200, says Coldiretti, a farmers’ organisation. To some, the swap means just adapting to nature. “If you think about Sicily, you think about oranges, but they are not native here,” Mr Morettino points out. ■To stay on top of the biggest European stories, sign up to Café Europa, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.