Europe - Kurds and Turks are closer than ever to peace

They are both suspicious of Israeli aims in the region. Putting ASSAULT rifles in a giant cauldron and setting them on fire might not be the most sensible way to dispose of the things. Given the context, however, you could forgive the 30-odd Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) fighters, half of them women, who did so on July 11th outside a cave in northern Iraq, for engaging in a little pageantry. After more than four decades and 40,000 dead, the war between Turkey and the PKK, one of the world’s longest-lasting conflicts, seems to be drawing to a close. The PKK is expected to continue to disarm over the summer, on the orders of its imprisoned leader, Abdullah Ocalan. A parliamentary commission in Turkey will oversee the process. An amnesty for some PKK leaders may be on the table.This is the closest Turkey and the insurgents have come to peace since the PKK took up arms to fight for a Kurdish homeland in 1984. The logic of previous talks with the PKK has been turned on its head. Turkey, now with a population of 88m, formerly saw concessions to the country’s 15m or so Kurds as a way to persuade the PKK to disarm. This time around, Turkey’s government, headed by President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, expects the PKK to disband before it commits to any reforms.Mr Erdogan, as a good friend of his in the White House would put it, is holding most of the cards. Thousands of Kurdish politicians and activists in Turkey are behind bars, often on spurious terrorism charges. Turkish army offensives and drone strikes have squeezed the PKK in the highlands of northern Iraq, the group’s stronghold. Mr Erdogan also hopes a deal with the Kurds, which he would market as a victory over the PKK, can prolong his time in power, through a new constitution or early elections.But the path to peace with the PKK is also being paved by Israeli warplanes. Israel’s offers of support for the Kurdish insurgents in Syria and its opposition to Turkey’s growing military presence there, punctuated by air raids on Syrian bases slated to come under Turkish control, have policymakers in Ankara on edge. Many of them are persuaded that Israel’s prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, will try to use the PKK and its offshoots, especially in Syria, not only against the Islamist rulers in Damascus but also against Turkey. They hope that a deal with the PKK can stave off that threat.Turkey’s foreign minister, Hakan Fidan, has already warned the People’s Protection Units (YPG), the PKK’s Syrian franchise, not to take advantage of Israel’s attempts to destabilise Syria. “Trying to exploit the turmoil will only lead to bigger problems,” he said on July 16th, hours after Israel bombed the Syrian defence ministry in response to clashes between Bedouin and Druze fighters in Syria’s south.Fears that Israel might attack Turkey are felt not just by Turkish conspiracy theorists. Watching the wars in Gaza, Lebanon and Iran, and noting Israel’s hostility to the new Syria, Mr Erdogan’s inner circle reckons Israel is determined to undermine Turkey’s sovereignty. This was expressed by Devlet Bahceli, the Turkish leader’s main coalition partner and the architect of the government’s outreach to the PKK, days after Israeli jets struck Iran. “Turkey is the ultimate target,” he lamented. An increasing number of Turks seem to agree. In a recent Pew survey a plurality of them (43%) identified Israel as the biggest threat to their country. America, a NATO ally, came in at 30%, Russia at 2%.Mr Ocalan takes a similar view. During talks with Kurdish lawmakers at his island prison this spring, he claimed Israel had redoubled its efforts to enlist the YPG in a proxy war against Turkey. Only he could prevent such a scenario, he said, according to leaked minutes of the meeting. Turks and Kurds are rubbing their eyes in disbelief. Mr Bahceli and Mr Ocalan, both in their late 70s, had been sworn enemies as long as anyone can remember. These days, thanks to the chaos consuming the region, the man who invoked Marx to wage war in the name of Kurdish autonomy and the nationalist firebrand who once called for the PKK leader to be hanged are suddenly partners in peace. ■To stay on top of the biggest European stories, sign up to Café Europa, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.