Europe - Cigarettes, booze and petrol bankroll Europe’s welfare empire

But what if people give up their sinful ways?. Is it possible to feel the burden of sin in a continent that is all but godless, as Europe is these days? Prostitution barely generates a frisson in Belgium, a land of unionised hookers. Puffing cannabis is legal in Germany, of all places. Gambling via lotteries or mobile apps is uncontentious just about everywhere. But to feel the weight of social disapproval, try buying a bottle of wine in Sweden. Since 1955 a state-run monopoly has begrudgingly dispensed alcohol to those who insist on drinking it. The Systembolaget, as it is known, oozes disapproval. Stores are sparse and closed on Sundays. If you find one, forget posters of appealing vineyards as you browse the shelves: the decor is part Albanian government office, part pharmacy. There are no discounts to be had, nor a loyalty programme. Wine is left unchilled lest a customer be tempted to down it on a whim. As they queue to pay, shoppers are made to trudge past a “regret basket” that primly suggests they leave some of their hoard behind. The road to Swedish hell is, apparently, lined with lukewarm bottles of sauvignon blanc.And pricey ones, too. For it is not only Systembolaget’s profits that flow to the state, but the hefty excise duties imposed on what it sells. Whether in restaurants or in shops, booze is eye-wateringly expensive: in Sweden drinking serves both to numb the senses and lighten the wallet. Across Europe such “behavioural taxes” have become mainstream, and a useful fiscal bump to sustain stretched welfare states. Smokers have long put up with inflation rates on cigarettes reminiscent of Weimar Germany. A dozen European countries including France and Poland impose tithes on sugary drinks. Energy taxes clobber motorists whose cars are fuelled by planet-warming petrol. Such “sin taxes” allow European politicians to indulge in their two great passions: nannying the public and filling public coffers. Alas the two are in opposition, seeing that pricey sinning makes for fewer sinners.Europe has a special (and arguably dubious) rationale for taxing the unholy trinity that are booze, cigs and petrol: its publicly funded health-care systems ultimately pick up the tab for citizens’ bad habits, and society at large will pay the cost of adapting to global warming. Reducing such “externalities” through tax has a long pedigree, going back to 17th-century British levies on tobacco. Over time the taxes have become not so much a nudge as a walloping. Irish smokers pay €18 ($21) for a pack of cigarettes these days, of which 80% flows straight to the state. A bottle of Absolut vodka in Sweden includes €14 of excise, well over half its price in the Systembolaget. The Netherlands adds €0.79 to each litre of petrol, equivalent to $3.55 a gallon, more than Americans pay at the pump. Alcohol and cigarettes contribute over €100bn a year to Europe’s exchequers, with energy taxes over double that—a handy few percentage points of GDP. To some governments they are vital: in Bulgaria environmental and excise taxes amount to around a tenth of the total state budget.The downside of sin taxes is that government finances suffer when bad habits get kicked. Smoking and drinking have both declined markedly in recent decades. Whether that is because of high taxes or other factors is up for debate. Young Europeans are on a straighter path than their parents were, including when it comes to untaxed activities like sex and illegal drugs. But the result is that revenues from smoking and drinking are down by around a fifth as a share of GDP in the past decade or so. Green taxes will cause an even bigger hole in public finances. By 2035 no new cars with combustion engines will be sold in the European Union; by 2050 the bloc is pledging to cut carbon emissions to net zero. Finance ministers will balk. Though the gains made from falling sales of accessories to sin will be felt years in the future, the fiscal pain of shrinking revenue hits immediately.Taxing sin has other issues. It often disproportionately burdens the poor, who smoke, drink and gamble more as a share of their income and drive older petrol-guzzling cars. Levies applied by one national government are easy to circumvent, especially in the EU where people can freely travel to neighbouring countries with lower excise rates to stock up on Marlboros, cognac and diesel. No tax is popular, but those on petrol have a special way of irking people. In 2018 a rise in fuel duties sparked the “yellow jackets” protests in France. And what of the argument that unhealthy habits like smoking are good for the exchequer? In 2001 the Czech arm of Philip Morris, a cigarette peddler, even argued that smokers save the state money by dying younger, thus relieving the public purse of the need to pay the pensions, health care and housing of those killed off early.As revenues on existing sin taxes decline, finance ministers are on the hunt for new ones to replace them. After sugary drinks, it may soon be the turn of meat to get a special tax: methane-belching cows are the next frontier in combating climate change. The EU is brimming with ideas of new sins to tax, not least as it hopes some might fund its budget directly. Levies on unrecycled plastics already flow to its coffers. On July 16th the European Commission proposed to extend excise on tobacco beyond cigarettes to vapes, as well as receiving some of the proceeds of carbon credits.Why stop there? Smoking, drinking and boiling the planet are bad, certainly. But policymakers might usefully update the list of sins to be tackled. Would any sane European oppose tripling the income taxes of people who blithely watch videos on public transport without earphones? Charlemagne would happily vote for tourism levies targeting social-media influencers who turn perfectly good Parisian cafés into Instagram backdrops. Electric scooters are a nuisance, too. The problem with taxes on addiction is it is easy for politicians to end up addicted to them. ■Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.