Middle East & Africa - A bloody week in Syria may have ripple effects in Lebanon

The presidents of both countries have limited time to rein in vicious militias. THE CEASEFIRE is holding, for now. A week of communal violence in Suwayda, a governorate in southern Syria, began on July 11th when someone abducted a merchant on the motorway. That led to clashes between his Druze sect and Bedouin tribes. The government in Damascus sent troops; instead of restoring order, they carried out summary executions of Druze men and other atrocities. A fragile truce ended the bloodshed on July 20th, but many Syrians worry it will resume.Even if it does not, the incident seems a grim turning-point in Syria’s transition. It has reinforced fears that the state is incapable of protecting minority groups. It may also have ripple effects in neighbouring Lebanon, where the government sworn in earlier this year is trying to disarm Hizbullah, a Shia militia.Different as they are, Lebanon and Syria have a similar problem: the state is struggling to control and secure its territory—and America, which supports both governments, seems unable to offer much help.Start with Lebanon. The army has sent more than half of a planned deployment of 10,000 soldiers south of the Litani river, a region bordering Israel that has long been Hizbullah’s playground (see map). They now control areas that were previously off-limits. General Rodolph Haykal, the army chief, said in April that his men had carried out more than 5,000 operations to confiscate weapons.These are not trivial accomplishments. Even Israeli army officers say they are unexpectedly pleased with the Lebanese army’s progress. But they are easy wins: Hizbullah has made a tactical retreat from the south, where Israel continues to attack it despite a ceasefire in November 2024.It will be harder to make progress north of the Litani, as America hopes to see by year’s end. Hizbullah will be more reluctant to hand over its weapons there. There is also the question of its men, thousands of whom would need to be demobilised. The government is trying to convince Hizbullah to relent in exchange for help rebuilding Shia-majority areas pummelled by Israel during last year’s war, but the group is stubborn.Joseph Aoun, the president, frets that being too tough on Hizbullah will lead to sectarian violence. “It’s not lack of will,” says Tarek Mitri, the deputy prime minister. “[We] cannot do this by force. It needs political discussions with Hizbullah, and Hizbullah is a very tough nut to crack.” Delay risks giving the militia a chance to regroup, though. It may also alienate Mr Aoun’s allies in America and the Gulf; the latter are already getting frustrated.If Mr Aoun has perhaps been too conciliatory, his Syrian counterpart has not been conciliatory enough. Ahmed al-Sharaa has made great strides towards ending Syria’s international isolation. He has made less progress at reining in radical militias and organising a professional army, as the violence in Suwayda made clear.Nor was it an isolated incident. In March pro-government militias massacred more than 1,000 Alawites, another minority sect, in Syria’s coastal region. A suicide-bomb attack at a church near Damascus in June was the work of an extremist group, and roundly condemned by the government. Still, it added to a sense that the fragile Syrian state is not capable of providing security.In a grim irony, the committee established to investigate the massacre in March presented its report to Mr Sharaa on July 20th, as Suwayda was still reeling. It concluded that commanders had not ordered the killings of Alawites—in effect, pinning blame on lower-ranking soldiers. That will be seen by some Syrians as a whitewash.The job of cajoling both governments has largely fallen to Tom Barrack, the American ambassador to Turkey, who has assumed a second role as Donald Trump’s envoy to the Levant. Mr Barrack has tried to strike a more respectful tone than his predecessor, Morgan Ortagus, who once suggested that Lebanon’s leading Druze politician was on crack.If he wins points for style, though, he has delivered less on substance. On frequent visits to Lebanon Mr Barrack has refused to offer guarantees for when Israel might cease its near-daily air strikes or withdraw from five points near the border it continues to occupy. Nor has he made any commitment of financial aid, beyond a vague promise that Saudi Arabia and Qatar will help rebuild battered south Lebanon. “We’re not in that business any more. We’re not in nation-building,” he says.What happens in Syria may not stay there. Hizbullah’s allies were quick to make hay from the violence in Suwayda: if the group relinquishes its weapons, they argue, no one will be able to protect Lebanon from militias next door. That argument may resonate with some Lebanese, who lived through a three-decade Syrian occupation that ended in 2005. It did not help when Mr Barrack, prone to gnomic pronouncements, implied that Lebanon could be swallowed up by its neighbour.For the first time in decades, America, Lebanon and Syria agree on a common goal in the region. If they do not move faster, though, they may miss their opportunity to achieve it. ■Sign up to the Middle East Dispatch, a weekly newsletter that keeps you in the loop on a fascinating, complex and consequential part of the world.