Britain - A year after Britain’s riots, things have deteriorated

The police are better; the politicians are worse. It is hard to recover from an enormity, and Southport, north of Liverpool, suffered two. On July 29th last year a 17-year-old named Axel Rudakubana murdered three young girls and tried to kill many others. The next day, as rumours spread that the killer was a Muslim asylum-seeker, a mob attacked a nearby mosque and a police van. The windows of the mosque are still covered with protective screens. Norman Wallis, who runs Adventure Coast Southport, an amusement park, says business is slow. He thinks that people hesitate to enjoy themselves, out of sympathy.Still, Southport has taken positive steps. The victims’ families have formed community groups and have made it clear that they want no vigil on the anniversary of the murders. Public gardens in Southport’s elegant, somewhat faded centre will be renovated as a tribute to the girls. Patrick Hurley, the local MP, speaks of stronger emotional bonds and a growing willingness to help others. In the rest of Britain, by contrast, the wounds inflicted a year ago fester.Violence broke out in many cities and towns after the Southport riot. Some places, like Belfast and London, have long histories of disorder. In others the disturbances were shocking. Protesters clashed with the police in Weymouth, a southern seaside town. One of the worst riots was in Tamworth, near Birmingham—a town that gave its name to a fine pig breed. The crowd there attacked police, smashed its way into a hotel with asylum-seekers inside and tried to set it on fire.Some were more like organised assaults than protests. Few attendees carried placards, although some were draped in British or English flags. They attacked mosques and hotels containing asylum-seekers. Anybody who tried to stop them became a target. In Sunderland a taxi carrying Filipino nurses was attacked; in Burnley Muslim graves were vandalised.Most rioters seem to have been local people. Some had violent histories. A study by John Drury of the University of Sussex and others found that, of 94 people arrested in Stoke-on-Trent, 80 had been arrested before in relation to a total of 1,127 offences. But the riots also drew families who came to watch and cheer. Almost one-fifth of those arrested in Stoke were under 18.Protests and riots do not just accomplish tangible things in the moment, such as damaging property. They also create movements, as people who hold niche or scorned views see their passions reflected in others’ eyes and actions. Mr Drury, who studies crowds, notes that Tommy Robinson, a rabble-rouser, held a large rally in London two days before the Southport murders. Extremists may have been in a confident mood, believing their vision of a foreigner-free country was widely shared.The riots delivered a brutal version of that message to migrants. Rioting hit Stoke-on-Trent in the West Midlands on the day that Asha, a charity, had taken many asylum-seekers to the seaside. They were marooned in a motorway service station while the police worked to restore order. Godfrey Seminega of Asha notices that asylum-seekers seldom hang around central Stoke in the early evening these days, as they did before the riots occurred. “People are still very scared”, he says.Britons’ confidence in multiculturalism was shaken, too. hope Not Hate, an anti-fascist group, happened to be polling when the murders and riot took place in Southport. It found that attitudes to Muslims and immigrants quickly hardened. A recent poll by British Future, a think-tank, shows that people are more concerned about divisions between immigrants and natives than between any other groups, including the rich and the poor.The police vigorously pursued brick-chuckers and laptop demagogues alike, arresting more than 1,800 people. “We were arresting people and putting them in court the next day,” says Ian Drummond-Smith, who investigated the riots at the National Police Chiefs’ Council. It helped that body-worn cameras and cctv are ubiquitous. It was a sharp rebuke, popular among the public. But the crackdown created opportunities for martyr-making. Peter Lynch, a 61-year-old man who was convicted of violent disorder, was found dead in his prison cell. “I am Peter Lynch” shirts and signs soon appeared. Some mps object to the imprisonment of Lucy Connolly (the wife of a Tory town councillor), who called for attacks on hotels and pleaded guilty to inciting racial hatred.Merseyside Police announced on the day of the murders that a 17-year-old “originally from Cardiff” had been arrested, but did not say that he had been born in Cardiff and was British. A report by the national police inspectorate argued that in future the police should “fill the information void with the truth”. They have heeded that message. In May this year somebody drove a car into a crowd of Liverpool football supporters. Just two hours later, Merseyside Police announced that they had arrested a white British man.Anti-racist groups played crucial roles in the riots. They rallied in Stoke-on-Trent, hoping that anti-immigrant protesters would abuse them rather than attacking targets such as mosques (“bait on the hook”, as one later put it). In Bristol they protected a hotel until the police turned up. In some places, including Stoke, Muslim men attacked far-right protesters; some were later arrested and charged.“It was awful,” says Stuart Russell, an anti-racist campaigner who faced the mob in Tamworth. “We genuinely thought we weren’t going to get out.” Anti-racist activists staged large rallies after the riots had peaked, mostly in big, diverse cities where the far right is weak. Elsewhere, the feeling of being outnumbered lingers.Most dispiriting are the political changes over the past year. Last summer Britons thought the prime minister, Sir Keir Starmer, handled the riots fairly well. They gave lower marks to Nigel Farage, leader of Reform uk, who has been railing against asylum-seekers for years. In a much-watched video shot in 2020, he said the residents of one hotel could be terrorists, and other asylum-seekers had committed “horrible acts in our country”. When the riots broke out, he questioned whether the police were telling the truth about Mr Rudakubana.In the past week demonstrators have gathered in Epping to protest outside a hotel which houses asylum-seekers, including a man charged with sexual assault. Protesters chanted “send them home” and “save our kids”. Mr Farage warned of “civil disobedience on a vast scale”. On July 23rd protesters assembled for a second night outside an empty hotel in London, following false claims that asylum-seekers from Epping had been moved there.Reform now leads the polls. Far from toning down the rhetoric, Mr Farage and others on the hard right have taken to calling asylum-seekers “fighting-age men”. Tory mps refer to “two-tier policing” and “two-tier justice”, to imply that white people are treated more harshly than others.A year on, Sir Keir is in a defensive crouch. He has conceded that immigration risks turning Britain into an “island of strangers” and has sympathised with people who are angry about illegal immigration. Mr Robinson plans another rally in September, which Joe Mulhall, the director of research at hope Not Hate, expects to draw a big crowd. “The energy is with the far right at the moment,” he says.■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in Britain, sign up to Blighty, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.