Britain - The peril of trying to please people

Compromise rarely leads to contentment. But it nearly always leads to costs. For a long time Labour was happy to pick fights when it came to defending planning reform. Sir Keir Starmer was, by his own cautious standards, punchy about making it easier to build in Britain. No longer would NIMBYs (not in my back yard) be able to curtail building projects. No longer would taxpayers have to spend £120m ($160m) on a bat tunnel encasing a high-speed train, as an insurance policy against legal challenge by furry-flying-mammal lovers; newts would hinder housebuilders no more. In short, planning was to be a matter of conviction, not compromise.On July 17th compromise arrived. After complaints from a gang of environmental NGOs, the government put forward a slew of amendments to its flagship planning legislation. Once-implicit standards became explicit goals; environmental-compensation schemes became more stringent; any mitigation scheme must have the best scientific backing. Big environmental charities gave a cautious welcome; Labour’s vocal YIMBYs (yes in my back yard) stewed with rage, arguing this would make it easier for campaigners to tangle projects in legal challenges. To the government, it was a textbook compromise.In this, Labour has fallen into an all-too-common vice. Too much compromise, rather than too little, lies at the heart of recent cock-ups. Consider HS2, the over-budget railway between London and Birmingham. It is a lesson in failure, mainly because it was a lesson in compromise. Critics were bought off. Losers were compensated: a new golf clubhouse here; £500,000 for a new park there. Nimbys were placated by needless expensive tunnels through the Chiltern Hills. Compromise cost a lot. But it did little to allay any concern. When the tunnels were dug, residents complained about the unnerving sense of a train beneath their feet. Those who opposed HS2 at the start oppose it still.Compromise has already damaged Sir Keir’s government. An unpopular scheme to remove an (up to) £300 winter-fuel allowance from pensioners has been partly reversed. Now pensioners who earn less than £35,000 a year, which is about three-quarters of them, will receive it. A cost-saving measure will save almost no costs, as a compromise. Before the decision Labour could count on the support of about 13% of pensioners. After the decision, it is about 15%. Once focus groups complained about the elderly losing £300 a year, points out Luke Tryl, from More In Common, a pollster; increasingly, they grumble about u-turns.If compromise is overrated, ploughing on is underrated. Even the vociferous critics sometimes disappear. “Waspi” (Women Against State Pension Inequality) campaigners spent years demanding compensation for those born in the 1950s affected when the female pension age was increased from 60 to 65. In 2024 an ombudsman suggested a compromise: compensation of between £1,000 and £2,950 for anyone affected—much lower than the five-figure sums campaigners had demanded. Mercifully, ministers told the ombudsman to get lost. Blowback came there none.It was a similar story when Labour introduced inheritance tax on farmers with assets above £1m. For a brief period rural revolution was on the cards, if more hysterical commentators were to be believed. Jeremy Clarkson, the motorhead-turned-voice-of-rural-England, led a march on Whitehall. Compromise was demanded. None came. Rural rebellion has yet to erupt. In any policy, some people lose out. Politics is simply the process of choosing who.Sometimes, however, it is simply too tempting to duck that choice. The environmental charities that called for the changes are well-organised and well-liked. Some are also very big. The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds alone has 1.2m members, making it about the same size as the American armed forces. Each charity is able to deluge MPs with hundreds of thousands of pro-forma complaints. When it comes to shaping political discourse, MPs feel outnumbered and outgunned. How many divisions has the pope? How big a mailing list has the Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government?Compromise on planning speaks to a deeper crisis of confidence. The planning bill sailed through the Commons. Harsher amendments tabled by a Labour rebel (since booted out of the party) were voted down overwhelmingly. Yet now Labour’s planning reforms have been watered down before the government has even lost a vote. At times this Labour government behaves as if it is illegitimate. Elections become a mere starting point to negotiate with the actual powers in Britain, rather than a mandate to do anything. Consultations must be run; inquiries held; stakeholders engaged. If well-organised groups oppose a policy, who is His Majesty’s Government to argue otherwise?Come autumn, if the weakened planning bill sails through the upper house without complaint from the larger environmental charities, perhaps it will have been worth it. The faster it passes Parliament, the quicker people can start building. The Office for Budget Responsibility has always priced the bill into its growth forecasts, arguing that planning changes will make the British economy about 0.2% bigger in 2029 than it would otherwise have been. It is not much, but it is much needed.That is not the only possible path. After all, the government has been here before. Environmental ngos had initially praised the government’s plans. A month later they labelled them “cash to trash”. The same incentives are in play again. Why stop at the current concession if more can be squeezed? Less politic environmentalists are already grumbling. “The fight goes on,” declared one association of ecologists. Larger groups may join them. If they do, all that will be left is a less effective law, a public scrap and a government that will wish it had held its ground and won. ■Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.