International - Rethinking the war on AIDS

American funding cuts are a catalyst for fresh thinking. AIDS AND HIV, the virus that causes it, once sparked fear across the world. Apocalyptic forecasters in early 2002 reckoned that in some southern African countries half of new mothers would soon die of AIDS. Tens of millions of lives would be lost over coming decades. Economies would be devastated. Instead, what was arguably the most effective foreign-aid programme ever was introduced in 2003 by President George W. Bush.The President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) is thought to have saved some 26m lives through providing treatment for those infected. More importantly, by helping to reduce the number of new HIV infections, it has played a vital role in bringing the disease under control. What once seemed unthinkable two decades ago, very recently seemed tantalisingly within reach. So much so that UNAIDS, a UN body, hoped the world could end AIDS as a major public-health threat by 2030. Instead, PEPFAR suddenly found itself in the emergency room on life support.On January 20th it was a victim of Donald Trump’s cull of American foreign aid, promulgated as part of his flurry of executive orders signed on the day of his inauguration. Four days later, its activities were brought to a shuddering halt by a “stop-work” order (see chart 1).A few days later, however, it was given a waiver to continue “life-saving humanitarian assistance”—mainly dispensing anti-retroviral (ARV) drugs to those already taking them and offering pre-exposure prophylactic (PrEP) medicine to pregnant women and nursing mothers, to prevent mother-to-child transmission of HIV. Thankfully, the dust is now settling. A threat to claw back $400m from this year’s budget allocation was averted on July 18th. As to next year, the administration has asked Congress for $2.9bn to support PEPFAR’s direct efforts in recipient countries. That is down $1.9bn from the current amount. But it is not negligible.The international AIDS establishment has nevertheless been given the shock of its life. The stop-work order resulted in scores, probably hundreds, of PEPFAR-supported clinics and community-based projects laying off their staff and closing their doors. Even though many were able to re-open for more limited business when the waiver was promulgated, restarting operations often proved tricky. Staff had to be re-recruited, systems rebooted and trust re-established among those being helped, many of whom had required a deal of persuading to take the drugs in the first place.Meanwhile, and ironically, June 18th saw one of the most significant recent advances in HIV medicine. An injectable and long-lasting form of PrEP, called lenacapavir, was approved for use by America’s Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and thus given a green light for deployment around the world. The main existing form of PrEP is a daily pill. An injection of lenacapavir every six months will do the same job. If, that is, someone will pay for it.A meeting of the International AIDS Society (IAS), held this month in Kigali, Rwanda, has provided an opportunity to discuss where to go from here. The reluctant consensus, captured by Mitchell Warren, co-chair of the Global HIV Prevention Coalition and a member of PEPFAR’s scientific advisory board, was that after an earthquake of this magnitude you do not try to re-erect the building that has fallen down. Rather, you build a different one.Until Mr Trump’s executive order, the war on AIDS had been going reasonably well. The number of HIV-related deaths in 2024 was 630,000—down from a peak of 2m two decades earlier. And the annual number of new infections, which peaked in 1995 at 3.4m, is now 1.3m, according to a new report by UNAIDS (see chart 2).Those numbers are, however, unchanged from the previous year, reflecting the fact that it is getting progressively harder to reach the remaining cases and at-risk individuals. Nevertheless, there was optimism that the downward trend would return with lenacapavir, and be reinforced by other innovations on the horizon.Fighting HIV has always, though, depended disproportionately on American money. About three-quarters of foreign aid devoted to combating the virus in poor and middle-income countries comes from the pockets of America’s taxpayers. This is disbursed both directly by PEPFAR and indirectly via a grant to the Global Fund, an international body based in Geneva that fights AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria—a grant which will continue if the administration’s budgetary requests are accepted, but which cannot now exceed 20% of total contributions to the fund (down from about 33% last year).The main consequence of PEPFAR’s budget reduction will thus be to throw responsibility back to the recipient countries, which will have to find far more of the money themselves. This had always been the intention, but translating intent into practice has been slow.There has been some progress, with 26 of 61 countries surveyed by UNAIDS, responding to events by increasing their AIDS budgets. Among these are all seven countries (Ethiopia, Kenya, Nigeria, Malawi, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe) looked at by Richard Ochando of the AIDS Vaccine Advocacy Coalition and his colleagues. Nigeria, Tanzania and Zimbabwe have also earmarked certain tax receipts specifically for AIDS. That is a good start, but is unlikely to be enough. Belt-tightening and getting the best bang for a buck will also be needed. In this context, two ideas kept recurring at the meeting: service integration, and better, more granular data collection. Awkwardly, though, the first is unpopular and the pair are pulling in opposite directions.One consequence of PEPFAR’s involvement is that many countries’ AIDS programmes have taken on a life of their own, separate from mainstream national-health services. It is widely agreed that savings could be made by ending this division, and Dr Ochando found that three of his seven countries (Ethiopia, Tanzania and Zambia) are doing just that. Unfortunately, as a protest which took over the stage at the meeting’s opening ceremony emphasised, integration is often opposed by those getting treatment. People who wish to hide their HIV-positive or at-risk status—which is many people—often do not want to attend mainstream clinics for fear of being “outed”. Forward-thinking AIDS programmes reflect this. In South Africa, for example, Linda-Gail Bekker, a doyenne of the field who is head of the Desmond Tutu Health Foundation, has developed a network whereby those on ARV drugs can pick them up at school, university or even the hairdresser.Integration also risks losing the deep roots in local communities that many AIDS programmes have developed, and which will be needed to sustain the second idea, more granular data collection. Two examples of how to manage these risks are Rwanda and Malawi. Rwanda, the meeting’s host, has taken data collecting seriously for years. This has nipped numerous problems in the bud and helped make the country one of seven in Africa to reach a UNAIDS target of scoring at least 95% for three objectives: the share of infected people aware of this, being treated and whose drugs are suppressing their infections. Malawi, which is within a gnat’s whisker of joining Rwanda in the first division (its current scores are 95-94.9-94.9), hopes to cross the threshold in part via an initiative called the Blantyre Prevention Strategy. This project, named after Malawi’s second city, where it is being tested, revolves around a purpose-built online dashboard that makes infection data available to all who need them.And then there is lenacapavir. Trials organised by Dr Bekker, which led directly to the FDA’s approval, showed it was 100% effective in preventing infections for women and 96% effective for a group consisting of gay men, transgender and non-binary individuals. In light of this, on July 9th the Global Fund announced a deal with Gilead, lenacapavir’s creator, that the fund’s boss, Peter Sands, hopes will allow it to offer the drug to 2m people within three years.Two other developments may prove equally important. One is a monthly PrEP pill, code-named MK8527 by its developer, Merck, and now in late-stage clinical trials. This might suit those who do not like injections. The other is a pair of long-lasting HIV treatments based on a drug called cabotegravir. This drug is already available as a PrEP, but it is likely to be superseded in that role by lenacapavir because it must be injected every two months as a prophylaxis rather than every six for lenacapavir. Regardless of this good news, it seems clear that, as a result of funding cuts, many will die over the next few years who would not have otherwise. Just how many, is hard to say. A study published in April in the Lancet, a British medical journal, estimated that 500,000 additional children could succumb by 2030 if PEPFAR ceased operations. The UNAIDS report suggested an extra 6m HIV infections and 4m deaths by 2029. In practice, it should not be that bad, for PEPFAR is not ceasing operations, just scaling back. But a more limited rise in infections, at least in the short run, seems inevitable.Dr Warren’s new building is thus very much a work in progress. The old one, the house of PEPFAR, was a mighty edifice. And, though the superstructure has now gone, if its foundations prove not to have been too badly damaged by the earthquake, they will surely form the basis of whatever now arises. With luck, a combination of new thinking and new technology will create something that can do the job. With luck. ■