Finance & economics - Has Trump damaged the dollar?

Yes. How badly will become clear in the next crisis. Since Donald Trump returned to the White House, American investors have received one shock after another—so it really takes something to make them jump these days. Announcements that not long ago would have been bombshells, such as the president deciding to levy a tariff of 50% on copper or 30% on the European Union, prompt a shrug. A rare exception came on July 16th, when Mr Trump seemed to contemplate sacking Jerome Powell, chair of the Federal Reserve. But even then the reaction was relatively muted: a pop in Treasury yields and slump in the dollar. Mr Trump reversed course; business got back to normal. The following day American stockmarkets hit all-time highs.Inured as investors might be to the chaos, they are not ignoring it entirely. One sign of concern is that, since Mr Trump’s inauguration, the dollar has fallen by almost 10% against a basket of rich-world currencies. That is the exact opposite of what Scott Bessent, the treasury secretary, had predicted, thinking tariffs would strengthen the dollar because American firms would buy less foreign currency in order to fund imports. From capricious tariff-setting to blowout deficits, there are ample reasons for investors to be cautious about buying American assets. But just how cautious are they? Or, put another way, three months on from Mr Trump’s “Liberation Day”, how wounded is America’s status as a safe place to stash cash?The case for concern starts with the usual driver of dollar moves: differences in interest rates between America and elsewhere. In developed markets currencies generally gain value as interest rates rise, with foreign investors looking to take advantage of the better returns on offer. That relationship broke down for a stretch in April, when Mr Trump’s tariff announcements prompted investors to shed American assets, sending Treasury yields soaring and the dollar plummeting (see chart 1). Such a pattern, of exchange rates and bond yields moving inversely, is usually seen in emerging markets. It was also a feature of Britain’s gilt-market drama in 2022, when a budget by Liz Truss, then prime minister, threatened a fiscal meltdown.Since April, the dollar and interest-rate differentials have started to move in tandem once again. All the same, the greenback is yet to claw back its lost ground, suggesting a persistent dent to its valuation. Assessing where rate differentials alone would have put the dollar is not quite conclusive—over longer periods other factors, such as relative growth, also move currencies—but this evidence does indicate that Mr Trump has done damage.Another hallmark of the dollar is that it strengthens in times of trouble, as investors rush to safe assets. That pattern, too, flipped in April. The Vix, a measure of market volatility often used as a proxy for investor fear, soared as the dollar sank. Steven Kamin of the American Enterprise Institute, a think-tank, has proposed using the link between the Vix and the dollar, after controlling for other variables such as interest rates, as a measure of greenback fragility. Doing so helps cleanly isolate moments in which risk is, against the historical norm, pulling investors from the dollar. Mr Kamin’s gauge does show more fragility after Liberation Day, but it has since returned to pre-inauguration levels (see chart 2).Thus, although the dollar is bruised, the damage is not worsening. Deterioration would take another crisis; one that goes beyond the day-to-day White House pantomime, which investors tune out.There is no shortage of potential sparks. If, for instance, the president’s latest tariff threats are actually implemented on August 1st, America’s effective tariff rates would return to the levels that prompted April’s angst. Pressure on the Fed could spiral out of control. And with Mr Trump there is always the potential for the unexpected. Only when the next storm hits will the scale of the damage be clear. Dollar-watchers will probably not need to wait too long for such an opportunity. ■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in economics, finance and markets, sign up to Money Talks, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.