Culture - How much would you pay to nab a table at a swanky restaurant?

A tech bro created a viral reservation-trading website. The industry wants to shut it down. “SEX AND THE CITY”, a hit tv show, is full of tips about love and living in New York. Alas, many of them are not fit for print, but one recommendation is to always have a tampon handy. In an early episode from 1998 Carrie and Samantha are desperate to dine at Manhattan’s hottest French bistro. With no reservation, and faced with a recalcitrant hostess, the women give up. But when that same hostess finds herself caught short in the toilets, she bashfully asks Carrie for some sanitary supplies. Soon Carrie and Samantha are seated, martinis in hand. “From that moment on we never had a problem getting a table at Balzac again,” Carrie says.Exclusive restaurants have long been alluring. But since the pandemic, when restaurants closed and people were forced to confront the awfulness of their own cooking, Americans have had an insatiable hunger for dining out. Social-media influencers have funnelled demand towards places where the food is good but the vibes are better. At the most sought-after spots, opportune tampons and the old tricks—such as slipping a crisp $100 bill to the maître d’—are not enough.The rich and famous have new methods. Get invited to use an American Express “black card” and, after paying a $10,000 joining fee and a $5,000 annual fee, you can get “preferred access” to prime tables. Some Wall Street firms pay the Balzacs of the world tens of thousands a month so they can wine and dine at will.Should buying bookings be the preserve of the rich? Jonas Frey, a German tech bro who lives in Miami and eats out six nights a week, thinks not. In 2021 he founded Appointment Trader. The website’s concept is simple: buyers can request reservations that they want but cannot get and sellers can offer reservations they already have. The price of the trade is determined by demand alone. Reservations in New York at Christmas, for example, sell for many times the price of a dinner tab.Last year a table at Carbone in New York went for $1,605 and the site’s top seller raked in $360,000. The average reservation in America fetches $125; in Europe, tables go for around $75. Mr Frey, Appointment Trader’s only employee, takes a commission of up to 30% on every sale, of which there were 7m in 2024. The best sellers do not scoop up dozens of reservations in one go—the platform punishes them for unsold ones—but rather scramble to fulfil requests. Most have friends on the inside, a hostess or chef who can set aside a table for a cut of the proceeds. Others work at the restaurants themselves.The restaurants were slow to catch on, but once they did they were livid. Their objections fall into three categories. The first is that Appointment Trader strips them of control and allows a third party to profit from their product. The second is a fear that if customers pay a premium that the restaurant does not know about, they are bound to be disappointed. The third is that they claim Appointment Trader is full of bots that overbook and drive up the number of no-shows, forcing restaurants to eat the costs of empty tables. Mr Frey has evidence to the contrary. Of the last 50,000 trades, just 1% did not show. The industry average is closer to 30%.Nonetheless the National Restaurant Association has banded together with Resy and OpenTable, the two biggest reservation websites, to lobby state governments to ban “reservation piracy”. They have had astonishing success. Last year New York banned Appointment Trader; this year Florida and Louisiana did too and other states are trying. The laws, many of which roll out this summer, prohibit trading without the restaurants’ consent. Lobbyists now want to pass the SEAT Act, a federal bill that would kick Appointment Trader out of America altogether.Over a meal at Mandolin, one of Miami’s trendiest lunch spots, Mr Frey explains that the loss of the American market “hurts like shit” but he is “too small to fight”. He plans to focus on Europe and has added the option to search for restaurants in Dutch, French and Spanish.His biggest frustration is the inefficiency of the existing restaurant-reservation system. Appointment Trader has “democratised luxury”, he says: thanks to his site, anyone who is willing to pay can get a seat at the world’s coolest restaurants. Youngsters, in particular, have eaten up the idea: most of his users are under the age of 35. Restaurateurs and lawmakers would do well to ingest an economics textbook. Appointment Trader merely reflects the true market-clearing price of a table at the trendiest joints. The prix fixe is a concept for menus, not markets. ■For more on the latest books, films, TV shows, albums and controversies, sign up to Plot Twist, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter