Culture - How satire is adapting to the second coming of Donald Trump

The conservative Babylon Bee is finding it easier than the Onion. After America’s presidential election last year, a headline in the Onion, a liberal satirical newspaper, was: “Trump calls Harris to congratulate himself on winning”. Technically, this joke is almost perfect. It is only eight words long, one of which elegantly subverts the other seven. Yet it has a serious flaw: no one would be surprised if it were true.And that illustrates a huge problem for satirists in the age of Donald Trump. He should be easy to mock, but he is not. One reason is that reality often overtakes satire. Scott Dikkers, founding editor of the Onion, chuckles as he recalls how many jokes from a Trump book he published in 2017 now read like news reports. “Donald Trump’s World Map”, for instance, shows Canada as “The next 50 states”. A fictional speech to the National Science Foundation ends with Mr Trump saying: “We’re going to get tough on science,” and “A few eggheads might get fired. Big Deal.”Philip Roth, a novelist, defined satire as “moral outrage transformed into comic art”. It is supposed to shame the target. But how can that work when the target is shameproof? “His personal vanity is…unshakable,” marvels Ian Hislop, the editor of Private Eye, a British satirical magazine. Also, “the idea of truth doesn’t interest him.” So the satirists’ staple of pointing out a politician’s hypocrisies and inconsistencies does not work. “You can still do that, but it’s just one of those things, like the sky is blue and water is wet,” says Luke Gordon Field, who edits the Beaverton, a wry Canadian news website.Surprisingly, the satirists who are coping best with the second Trump term are often not the liberals who find him repugnant, but conservatives who have a soft spot for him, while acknowledging some of his gargantuan flaws.Consider the Babylon Bee, a conservative satirical website set up in 2016. Its worldview is poles apart from that of most secular comics. The existence of God is taken for granted. (“Are your kids possessed by demons or just normal toddlers?” is a typical headline.) Though its readers probably voted for Mr Trump, they notice if he does things Jesus might frown at. For example, when he posted an AI-generated picture of himself as Pope, the Bee poked fun at his presumption by suggesting several changes he might make if installed in the Vatican. These included painting his own face over Adam’s in the Sistine Chapel and issuing more macho papal decrees: “Any saint who was martyred loses sainthood for being a wimp: Sad!”On policy, the Bee’s writers clearly sympathise with Mr Trump, yet they skewer his capriciousness (“Trump Draws Names Of Countries From Hat To Determine Next Tariff”) and his excesses. One story reports him ordering the removal of black pieces from all chess sets for being “a move behind every other piece in the set. Absolutely failing. These are clearly DEI hires and we need to fire them.” When Mr Trump’s administration announced plans to kick Chinese students out of America, the Bee responded with the headline: “American Students Unsure Who to Cheat Off After Trump Revokes Chinese Student Visas.”Democrats who wonder why more than half the country dislikes them could usefully spend time perusing the Bee. It flays their tiresome sanctimony (“Disaster: Liberal Goes Back In Time To Kill Hitler But Now Has No One To Compare People He Disagrees With To”); their unrigorous ideas about schooling (“Layoffs Delayed As Dept. Of Education Unable To Calculate What Fifty Percent Of Employees Would Be”); and their scepticism of market forces (“In Retrospect, Woman Attending Communist-Themed Party Should Have Realised There Wouldn’t Be Any Food”). It highlights how much middle America hates rioting, a problem many associate with the “defund-the-police” left. One headline mocks both the Trump administration’s anti-tax zeal and progressive scofflaws: “Elon Musk Disguises IRS Building As Tesla Dealership So Democrats Will Burn It Down.”The Bee also offers a handy gauge of tensions within the MAGA movement. Many of Mr Trump’s fans are furious at his failure to release a full list of “clients” of the late Jeffrey Epstein, a sexual predator and party-thrower for the rich and famous, despite what he said on the campaign trail. His order on July 18th to release more papers may disappoint, since it is not clear that the “list” exists. MAGA diehards feel betrayed. The Bee offered “7 Totally Plausible Explanations” for why Pam Bondi, Mr Trump’s attorney-general, has yet to publish the Epstein file she said was on her desk, including: “She really had the list, but her dog ate it, and she was going to try to piece it back together, but then some Haitians ate the dog.”Mr Trump has been famous for longer than most Americans have been alive: New York tabloids have been ridiculing him since the 1980s. Because he is so familiar, jokes about him often seem stale (enough already about his hair and his skin tone). Lampooning his flunkies and his policies can sound fresher. The Onion’s take on his vaccine-scorning health secretary was bleakly hilarious: “RFK junior vows to make measles deaths so common they won’t be upsetting any more.” So was its view of his deportations: “ICE Agent Decides He Wants Kids After Seeing Incredible Love and Devotion of Parents Begging Him Not To Take Their Child.” The Bee attracted 4.2m page visits in June, according to estimates by Semrush, a marketing platform. The Onion claims “4.3 trillion readers” daily but in fact had 3.1m last month.Sometimes it feels as if Onion writers are so outraged and exhausted by the administration that they do not know how to respond. “Republican Infighting Erupts Over Whether Trump Bill Beautiful Or Handsome” is only a five-out-of-ten gag. After Mr Trump’s national security adviser accidentally included the editor of the Atlantic in a group chat about impending military strikes, the Onion’s headline was merely workmanlike: “‘I messed up at work again,’ Crestfallen Michael Waltz Texts Wife, National Geographic Editorial Staff.” The Bee’s response, by contrast, was wonderfully sly: “Genius Trump Leaks War Plans To The Atlantic Where No One Will Ever See Them.”Learning what makes people laugh is valuable—particularly those on the other side of the partisan divide. It helps you understand them; and it helps you see your own shortcomings as others do. So it is a pity that Mr Trump pays no heed to the amateur comedian (and full-time economics professor) who made the best joke about his tariff policy, riffing on a Republican campaign slogan. Justin Wolfers of the University of Michigan told the BBC: “Trump has a pronoun problem. He keeps saying he’s imposing tariffs on they/them. But he’s actually imposing them on us.” ■For more on the latest books, films, TV shows, albums and controversies, sign up to Plot Twist, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter