Culture - Cha chaan teng, Hong Kong’s quirky fusion cafés, are going global

These days you can find Canto-Western food in several countries. Supposedly only “mad dogs and Englishmen go out in the mid-day sun”, but Hong Kongers brave it too for Lan Fong Yuen. The cha chaan teng, or tea restaurant, is one of the city’s oldest and attracts queues even on a sweltering day. With its sticky Formica tables, it is not glamorous. But diners are drawn by the smells of fried toast with condensed milk and buns served with crispy pork.For locals, dining in Lan Fong Yuen is a kind of ritual. The café has hardly changed since it opened in 1952. Cha chaan teng were set up when Hong Kong—then run by Britain—welcomed refugees from mainland China. They serve Canto-Western fusion fare and some of the offerings are an acquired taste, such as naaih cha, tooth-achingly sweet tea also served with condensed milk, and yunyeung, a mix of tea and instant coffee. But the cafés came to symbolise the city’s mix of East and West. They reflected “the cultural inclusiveness of Hong Kong”, says Sidney Cheung of the Chinese University of Hong Kong.Today the spirit that cha chaan teng embody is being stamped out. Since a national-security law was passed five years ago, in the summer of 2020, Hong Kong has taken an authoritarian turn. An estimated 500,000 people have left. Some cha chaan teng were branded “yellow” businesses—ie, sympathetic to pro-democracy activists—and faced difficulties with lease renewals. Many have closed.Yet Hong Kongers who left took their love of cha chaan teng with them. New joints have opened in the countries where people have resettled, such as America, Australia, Britain, Canada and Taiwan. Seven cha chaan teng have opened in Burwood, a suburb of Sydney. “For overseas Chinese, being able to taste the flavour of home in a foreign land is a kind of psychological comfort,” says Andy Lam, the owner of September Café in Taipei.He has adapted some of his dishes, dialling down the sweetness to appeal to local palates. For it is not only Hong Kong’s diaspora who are seeking out cha chaan teng. The cafés’ informal, convivial atmosphere is drawing in new, young customers. The hashtag #chachaanteng has 12.5m views on TikTok.Lucas Sin, a popular chef, is writing a cookbook about the cafés. Art Basel, Europe’s flagship art fair, opened a cha chaan teng pop-up in Paris in 2024. It was so popular that similar stalls followed at fairs in Miami and, ironically, in Hong Kong where, despite the closures, there are still thought to be 6,000 cha chaan teng.Larry Fung set up Uncle Lou, a Cantonese diner, in New York in 2021. Such restaurants, he argues, satisfy a “yearning” and a feeling of “nostalgia” for a time and a place “that a lot of people feel is fading away”. For many, cha chaan teng offer a memory of a different Hong Kong in a hot cup of naaih cha or yunyeung. ■