Obituary - Fauja Singh took up running somewhat late in life

The world’s oldest marathon runner died on July 14th, probably aged 114. If the age of a man could be known as easily as counting the rings on a tree, there might be no doubt about the age of Fauja Singh. His passport said he was born in 1911; but at that date, in British-ruled India, villagers like him got no birth certificates. Because the question kept coming up, as his tall runner’s body grew thinner and his white beard ever longer, he took to saying that he couldn’t remember how old he was. Since everything was on the internet, people could just look there.In contrast to this vagueness about years, his career in old age was timed to the minute. The 2000 London Marathon, 6 hours 54 minutes. (By 2003, he could run it in 6:02.) The 2003 New York City Marathon, 7:34:37. The Toronto Waterfront Marathon the same year, 5:40:04, a world record for a man of over 90, with an average pace of 12:58 a mile. In one day at a track meet in Ontario in 2011 he set eight world records for a centenarian, from 23 seconds for the 100 metres to 49:57 for the 5,000. He tended to shuffle as he ran, almost always in his marigold-yellow turban and blue-and-white running shoes, but he moved steadily and contentedly, because he was so happy. The first 20 miles of a marathon he could take in his stride; for the last 6.2 miles, when he felt a bit tired, he would call on God and talk to Him. Altogether, he ran nine.He sometimes claimed he did not go for records and that only his splendid coach, Harmander Singh, kept a list of his timings. It was true that, because of the birth-certificate mishap, Guinness World Records would not recognise him. And, being so old, he also often faced no competition. But if he heard that someone of over 90 had set a record, he went all out to smash it.It was extraordinary that his body obeyed him. Until he was five, he could not walk at all. His legs were so weak and frail that neighbours in his home village, Beas Pind in Punjab, called him Danda, “Stick”. He could stumble no more than a mile until he was 15; in consequence, he barely went to school. To allay the pain he was given all sorts of medicines, and at night his legs were bound with bandages. Then, gradually, they got better. When he went to work on the family farm, he walked in the fields for hours and started running, too. Village elders remembered him for the way he was always dashing around the place. Both he and God had evidently saved his legs for great things later.In his mid-30s he gave it up; but when, in his late 80s, he resumed it, his regime was fierce. Until 2013, when at 101 he called time, he ran 10-15km a day. His marathon-training track was a loop of roads in the east London suburbs, where he had lived since leaving Punjab in 1992 or so. (Again, he was unsure of the year.) Come rain or shine, he would be pounding them. In the morning, after rising at seven, he did yoga and meditation; at mealtimes he would go to the community kitchen at the local Sikh temple, the gurdwara, for a very small plate of roti, vegetables and dal. No rice for him, nor parathas or anything fried; he drank mostly water and ginger tea. His secret, though, was to start each day with an alsi pinni, a Punjabi powerball of flaxseed, wheat flour, jaggery and ghee. To his surprise, the pinnis of east London were as good, even better, than the ones he had devoured back home.It was grief that had driven him away. He had gone on farming for decades, making enough money to have a substantial house. Then in quick succession in the early 1990s he lost his wife, his eldest daughter, in childbirth, and his middle son Kuldip, killed when a sheet of corrugated iron crashed onto his head in a storm. After that, there seemed to be nothing to live for. His children had found jobs away or abroad; he was left with the labourers and the farm animals. Day after day he would mourn at the spot where Kuldip’s corpse had been cremated.At his son Sukhjinder’s insistence, however, he eventually went to join him in Ilford. He did not intend to stay; so much so, that he never learned either to write or to speak English. But the community was welcoming. He met his coach at the gurdwara, and it was another friend who tipped him off in 2000 that a local 20km race was being held for a cancer charity. Though he was 89, he signed up, raised £700 (about $1,000), and his later-life career was born. Running not only gave him a focus beyond his misfortunes, but he could also use it to help others. He gathered a group of elderly friends who liked to run too, and as “Sikhs in the City”, they raised money together. That group grew and grew. His almost-last race, in Hong Kong in 2012 (10km in 1:34, at 100) brought in $25,800.By this time he was famous. The turban undoubtedly helped; he refused to run in the simpler patka, insisting on full respectful magnificence. Adidas used him for an ad campaign alongside David Beckham; the queen invited him, and in 2015 he was awarded the British Empire Medal. All this attention thrilled him. He liked to keep up British standards, and appeared most stylishly round Ilford in three-piece suits with a neatly furled matching umbrella. (He had worn a three-piece suit to his first day of training, too, supposing it was the British form.) He was sorry, though, that because he had become a British citizen before his running took off, all his awards were won for Britain and not for India.He was sorry too, dreadfully so, about retiring. Although old age was his selling-point, he could not accept it. If he stopped running, he might be forgotten. So when in even later life he returned to Beas Pind, he did not let his discipline lapse. His diet stayed strict, though he added feasts of mangoes from the tree in his courtyard. The pinnis continued, and of course the exercise, though it was now a four-hour walk every day when the afternoon heat relented. At 3.30pm on July 14th he was just outside his house, about to start his walk, when a speeding SUV hit him.The driver did not stop. And his family and friends could not help thinking, sadly, that Fauja Singh might not have stopped either, indeed gone on for years, but for that. ■