The world this week - Business

Donald Trump’s signature policy of arbitrarily imposing tariffs on countries was thrown into disarray when the federal US Court of International Trade decided that he did not have the power to issue the duties under the economic-emergency law that he has cited. Its ruling does not apply to tariffs imposed under different laws, such as on steel and cars. The White House criticised the court, saying “It is not for unelected judges to decide” how to respond to an emergency. It will appeal against the finding. Before the decision Mr Trump suspended a threat to impose 50% tariffs on the European Union and extended a deadline for a trade deal to July 9th. Nvidia reported another bumper set of quarterly earnings. The producer of high-end chips for artificial intelligence saw its revenue soar by 69%, year on year, to $44.1bn, and net profit jump by 26%, to $18.8bn. And that was despite booking a $4.5bn charge in relation to Mr Trump’s curbs on sales to China. Jensen Huang, Nvidia’s chief executive, reiterated his criticism of those restrictions, arguing that shielding Chinese firms from American competition “only strengthens them abroad”.Xiaomi reported first-quarter revenue of 111.3bn yuan ($15.3bn), up by 47% year on year. The Chinese smartphone giant has been building up its electric-car business: deliveries rose by 9% compared with the previous quarter. But the venture is not yet turning a profit. Xiaomi’s units that develop electric cars, artificial intelligence and other new technologies lost 500m yuan.BYD, China’s leading maker of electric cars, sold more fully electric vehicles in Europe than Tesla for the first time, according to JATO Dynamics, a market research firm. Registrations of BYD cars soared in the region by 169% in April, year on year, as consumers soured on Elon Musk’s Tesla. The European carmakers’ association noted a 26.4% increase in overall sales in the EU of pure-battery vehicles in the first four months of the year. Stellantis, which counts Chrysler, Fiat and Peugeot among its brands, announced that Antonio Filosa would take over as chief executive, replacing Carlos Tavares, who resigned abruptly in December. Mr Filosa, an Italian, currently heads the carmaker’s North American division. He will have to steer Stellantis through uncertainty in the industry over tariffs. (The company’s biggest shareholder part-owns The Economist’s parent firm.)Volvo announced 3,000 lay-offs, affecting roughly 15% of its workforce, in an attempt to reduce costs. The carmaker said the job cuts would mostly affect office workers in Sweden, its home country. Volvo has promised to cut SKr18bn ($1.9bn) in costs after it announced a big drop in operating income in the first quarter.Nippon Steel’s bid to buy US Steel was back on again, after Donald Trump gave his support to the “planned partnership”. The president offered few details, saying only that America would retain control over US Steel. A senator from Pennsylvania, US Steel’s home state, said the government would retain veto power over key decisions at the company. Joe Biden blocked the takeover in the dying days of his presidency.Germany overtook Japan to become the world’s biggest holder of foreign assets, a position it last held in 1991. According to figures from Japan’s finance ministry, Japan’s net external assets rose to an all-time high of ¥533trn ($3.7trn). But Germany’s foreign assets rose faster, to ¥570trn. The trend was in part driven by the euro’s strength against Japan’s currency, which increased the value of many of Germany’s foreign assets in yen terms. China ranked third, with ¥516trn.Japan’s annual inflation rate held steady in April at 3.6%. But the core rate, which in Japan excludes food prices but includes energy, rose to 3.5%, the fastest pace since January 2023. Traders are now guessing whether the Bank of Japan will increase interest rates sooner rather than later.Salesforce agreed to buy Informatica for $8bn. Salesforce provides data-management software for businesses. Salesforce says the deal will strengthen its autonomous “AI agents”, which firms can deploy in areas such as customer service.After successfully making its way to space, SpaceX’s Starship fell back to Earth. The uncrewed rocket broke up while re-entering the atmosphere over the Indian Ocean, after spinning out of control. It was Starship’s third test flight since it was upgraded with a new design. Elon Musk, SpaceX’s boss, spied a silver lining: “Lot of good data to review,” he posted on X.