The world this week - Politics

The Trump administration intensified its crackdown on foreign students coming to American universities, as the State Department instructed American embassies not to process new visa applications. The government intends to strengthen its vetting process. That includes trawling students’ social media for anything inflammatory, such as support for Hamas. Marco Rubio, the secretary of state, said the administration would also “aggressively” rescind the visas of Chinese students, who normally eschew campus activism and make up a quarter of international students.The government escalated its fight with Harvard, telling federal departments to cancel contracts with the university worth around $100m. Donald Trump has already decided to terminate $2.6bn in research grants and has suggested he will give the money to schools that teach a trade instead. Earlier, a federal judge put a temporary stop to the Department of Homeland Security’s attempt to bar Harvard from enrolling foreign students. Harvard was not the only august liberal institution to fight back against the Trump administration. NPR and other public radio stations filed a lawsuit against Mr Trump’s directive to end all of their federal funding. The suit argues that the directive violates the constitution’s protections of free speech, and that only Congress has the power to pull the funding anyway.Elon Musk decided to leave his job in the administration heading the Department of Government Efficiency. Mr Musk’s announcement came soon after he criticised Mr Trump’s One Big Beautiful Bill Act, which passed the House of Representatives with just a one-vote margin and is headed to the Senate. Mr Musk said he was “disappointed” by the sweeping tax-and-spending bill, because it would undermine his work. A White House official was quoted as saying that the process of “offboarding” Mr Musk had begun.Russia stepped up its bombardment of Ukraine, as Vladimir Putin seized the opportunity of America’s disengagement from peace talks. Mr Putin had gone “absolutely crazy”, said Mr Trump, also noting that “he’s sending rockets into cities and killing people, and I don’t like it at all.” However, the American president has not authorised any new weapons for Ukraine, and shipments may soon end.Meanwhile, Russia regained some of the territory in Sumy that Ukraine had forced it out of in 2022, near the start of the war. Assessing the latest intelligence, Volodymyr Zelensky said there was no indication that Russia was “seriously considering peace or diplomacy”. He also said that Russia had amassed 50,000 troops near Sumy to prepare for a major offensive.The National Assembly in France voted in favour of a bill to legalise assisted dying, which will allow anyone over 18 who is suffering a life-threatening or terminal illness to apply for the procedure. Mental suffering alone will not be counted as a qualifying condition. The legislation winds its way to the Senate. Supporters of assisted dying hope it will become law in 2027.In Britain a 53-year-old man was arrested on suspicion of attempted murder, after he ploughed his car into crowds of football fans celebrating Liverpool winning the Premier League. Around 80 people were injured. The man is suspected of having been on drugs.Britain’s King Charles visited Canada, where he is also head of state, on a trip that was seen as providing moral support to Canadians amid Mr Trump’s trade war and musings about taking over the country. The king avoided any reference to Mr Trump or tariffs, but noted that “The true north is indeed strong and free.”The electoral authorities in Venezuela claimed the government had almost swept the board in regional and local elections. Filled with supporters of Nicolás Maduro’s autocratic regime, the electoral council provided no evidence for the victory. Observers said that a lack of voters at polling stations belied its statement that turnout was 43%. Only one state, Cojedes, now has a governor from the opposition.Mexico’s electoral body was reportedly investigating claims that political parties were trying to influence voters ahead of the country’s first-ever judicial elections on June 1st. All positions for magistrates, federal judges and Supreme Court justices are up for grabs, though the 5,000 or so candidates are not allowed to have any formal links with parties.An election in Suriname gave the opposition National Democratic Party 18 seats in the national assembly and the ruling Progressive Reform Party 17 seats. Smaller parties are being courted for their support to form a government. Like neighbouring Guyana, Suriname is on the cusp of an oil boom after the discovery of huge offshore reserves.Israel faced growing condemnation for its conduct in Gaza. Speaking about the war, Mr Trump said he would like “to stop that whole situation as quickly as possible”. Friedrich Merz, the chancellor of Germany and one of Israel’s staunchest supporters, said “the current level of attacks on Gaza can no longer be justified.” Meanwhile, it was confirmed that Muhammad Sinwar, one of the last senior commanders in Hamas, was killed in an Israeli strike in early May.Israel launched the American-backed Gaza Humanitarian Foundation, which is meant to distribute aid through private contractors via a number of hubs. It suspended the programme after crowds of Palestinians overran one site where food was to be handed out. Jake Wood, the head of the group, resigned, citing principles of “humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence”. Amid the disorder a UN food warehouse was looted. Scores of people were injured as they scrambled for supplies.Israel hit back at Houthi rebels in Yemen, after the Iranian-backed group launched a missile and projectile at Israel, both of which were intercepted. Israel said it destroyed the last remaining aeroplane used by the Houthis at Yemen’s main airport.According to press reports Joseph Kabila has returned to the Democratic Republic of Congo, which he led as president from 2001 to 2019 before going into voluntary exile. He visited Goma in eastern Congo, which is held by M23 rebels backed by Rwanda. Mr Kabila has denied claims that he supports the insurgency.Just a week after announcing that they would split, Australia’s Liberal and National parties said they had resolved their policy differences and would reunite their conservative alliance in opposition to the Labor government.The Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the Gulf Co-operation Council, which represents Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and other Persian Gulf countries (but not Iran), held a joint summit in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia’s capital. The meeting was called to develop economic ties between the regions. Li Qiang, China’s prime minister, spoke in support of globalisation and urged the summit to commit to expanding free trade.