Leaders - How Labour should save the NHS

Among all its ideas, the most important is to go all-in for digital transformation. Reform UK, the party leading in Britain’s polls, has an uninspiring slogan: “Britain is broken”. The fact that even the populists’ bumper sticker carries none of the hope of “Make America Great Again” says a lot about Britons’ mood. Nothing illustrates the malaise more strikingly than the state of their beloved National Health Service (NHS). Hospitals are crumbling, sometimes literally. Waiting lists in England are 7.4m, twice as long as before the covid-19 pandemic. Public satisfaction has collapsed from 70% in 2010 to 21% in 2024. “Broken” was also how Wes Streeting, Labour’s health secretary, described the service on his first day in office last year.But in the crisis lies an opportunity, particularly for the digital revolution the NHS needs. If Labour grabs it, it could cement its reputation as the only party to be trusted with the nation’s health. If it falters, voters will not forgive it.Labour has two big incentives. The first is political: to its voters, the NHS matters more than any other issue. Its strategists see saving the NHS as central to winning re-election. The ambitious Mr Streeting knows that fixing the NHS will be seen as a test of whether he is prime minister material.The second incentive is practical. Without reform, things will only get worse as the population ages and demand for health care grows. Other, better-funded health-care systems are struggling, too. France has a shortage of doctors; Australian emergency departments are as dreadful as British ones; some Canadian hospitals are as overcrowded as Latin American jails. To make the NHS sustainable, Labour must modernise the health service. Its blueprint is a ten-year plan, expected to be released in June.The plan involves three main shifts: moving care out of costly hospitals and into the community; focusing on prevention rather than just sickness; and dragging the NHS from paper and pagers into the digital age. All are sensible. And all have also been promised before. Past would-be reformers got sidetracked by penny-pinching and short-term fixes; Labour has already shown it could be vulnerable to repeating such mistakes. But this time there are also grounds for optimism—so long as Labour sets some priorities.The key will be for Mr Streeting to go all-in on digital transformation. This holds great potential to align Labour’s short- and longer-term ambitions. Some doctors already use artificial intelligence (AI) to transcribe patient consultations; studies suggest this can reduce time spent on clinical notes by 20%. Another AI app, which lets patients scan moles at home using their mobile phones, has cut skin-cancer referrals in half—a potential game-changer for dermatology. And in some GP surgeries, the use of online triage has slashed waiting times and removed the stress of the 8am appointment rush.But tech performs wonders only if staff and patients embrace it, and working practices adapt. To maximise the benefits of AI, more should be done with the health service’s trove of data. The NHS is unique in holding cradle-to-grave records on an entire population. This makes it a potential gold mine for research. Researchers at two London universities are training an AI model on anonymised data from 57m people in England, the aim being to predict future health risks such as heart attacks and hospital stays for groups of patients.Harnessing such potential requires investment: new computers, digital patient records and integrating the NHS’s fragmented and incompatible systems. It also requires avoiding being bogged down by centralised solutions. The government’s plans for a national single patient-record resembles a previous attempt that flopped. Instead, the NHS should learn from banking, which overcame a lack of standardisation to enable customers to see their bank and credit-card accounts in one place. In parts of the country, shared records are already helping plan, manage and provide services. In Lincolnshire linking NHS and social-care data helped cut emergency-department admissions by 58% in six months, by flagging those who needed social care.Reforming the NHS is a huge task, across many fronts. One is motivating demoralised staff, some of whom are planning strikes. Efforts to modernise IT systems are routinely caught up in a culture of mistrust and malaise. A proper transformation needs cash that the Treasury is wary of spending. The Health Foundation, a think-tank, estimates the digital shift for England alone will cost £15bn ($20bn) over five years—around 7% of the NHS’s annual budget. Labour did the unthinkable before, when it founded the NHS in 1948. It must not squander the opportunity to modernise its own creation. ■Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.