Letters - Does Europe have a free-speech problem?

Also this week, the Baltics and Russia, deep-sea mining, Catholicism, Adele and guinea pigs. Letters are welcome via e-mail to letters@economist.comFind out more about how we process your letterYour leader on “Europe’s free-speech problem” (May 17th) mentioned countries such as America and Hungary where free speech is actually threatened by the actions of autocratic governments. But when it came to western Europe you chose to focus on the regulation of “hate speech”. This buys into right-wing populist narratives about supposed infringements on free speech. These “infringements” are in fact important regulations that ultimately protect free speech.The rise of social media means that comparatively new forms of communication, including hate speech, require new and different responses from policymakers. Pursuing a libertarian approach, such as Elon Musk has done with X, boosts and empowers radicals, who are currently mostly on the right but potentially also on the left. And although it may be true that politicians sometimes overreact in their attempt to fight against hate speech, this is for the courts to sort out.Regulatory policies such as the European Union’s Digital Services Act are important tools ensuring that the voices of those who are less aggressive and more sensible get heard. Such legislation is based on democratic decisions, in contrast to the autocratic overreach in countries like America and Hungary on free speech.Marius BusemeyerProfessor of political scienceUniversity of KonstanzKonstanz, GermanyEurope is the birthplace of the Enlightenment and has forgotten how to nurture free expression, you say. On the contrary, Europe’s debates have never been livelier. Unlike America, where debate is based on emotion, or in China, where opinions are censored, European debates are grounded in free, honourable and principled dialogue. Europe has clear rules guaranteeing morality, factuality and plurality in its public discourse. There is a reason why the press in most European countries are consistently categorised as the freest in the world.Nandor GyörffyConstance, GermanyYou think that J.D. Vance was right to criticise Europeans on free speech. Europe is where the history comes from. America a land of ideals. In Europe we have been there, done that, lived through the Reign of Terror in the French Revolution and the Nazis. Speech matters. British police may have a bee in their bonnet about what anti-migrant riots stirred up online, but legislating and policing is messy and difficult. Free speech has to be balanced. All laws and policing are imperfect. We need a pragmatic approach that balances everyone’s rights. In America the poor and the marginalised are not heard.Like infinite monkeys typing Shakespeare’s plays, Mr Vance may occasionally be right, but this is not one of those occasions.Ed ManningCoventryYou are correct in saying that “Noisy disagreement is better than enforced silence.” Suppressing speech is often counterproductive, giving power to the voice that is suppressed. This is a global problem, from the Trump administration’s attempt to deport protesting students to India’s arrest of a professor for his recent comments on the conflict with Pakistan. In “Areopagitica”, one of the most famous defences of free speech, John Milton wrote, “Let her [truth] and falsehood grapple; who ever knew truth put to the worse in a free and open encounter.”Kai MistryLake Oswego, OregonThe Telegram column (April 26th) on the Baltic republics hardening their borders with Russia and Belarus was compelling. The countries are also using advanced technologies to enable their collective defence. For instance, the three Baltics along with Finland, Norway and Poland want to create a Drone Wall on their eastern flank to serve as an early-warning system through an unbroken layer of aerial systems.In addition, Estonia, a hub for tech startups, is galvanising local entrepreneurs to create solutions that boost Ukrainian and Baltic security. This includes government-backed regional hackathons, where innovators from all walks of life get together for a weekend. Estonian defence companies, such as Milrem Robotics and KrattWorks, take organised visits to Ukraine to learn some lessons and bring their products to the battlefield.Importantly, the government has launched a €100m ($114m) defence fund that will invest directly in defence companies and serve as a fund-of-funds for venture capitalists. This forms part of the government’s effort to pump additional private-sector investment into the industry.Unsurprisingly, the Baltics see themselves as next in line for Russian aggression, spurring an incredible focus on defence innovation. So the launch of new companies such as Frankenburg Technologies, which develops anti-drone missile systems for Ukraine, is designed to tackle the threat of a revanchist Russia.Joel BurkeWashington, DCBanyan’s column on the linguistic politics of India (May 10th) remarked on the resurgence of English. Nandan Nilekani, the co-founder of Infosys, wrote a book in 2009 titled “Imagining India: The Idea of a Renewed Nation”. In it he traced how decades of trying to suppress English in post-colonial India had some success as a way of drawing a line under the British Raj, but that in recent years the language had experienced a resurgence. Clearly that has continued, and probably gained momentum.Surprisingly, Mr Nilekani did not notice that the variety of language experiencing an Indian renaissance isn’t actually the one that post-colonial leaders attempted to suppress. They wanted to rid India of British English. What has been steadily growing during this century is American English.Frank LowtherNew Paltz, New YorkWe stand to lose far more than we could possibly gain by mining the deep seabed. Life-saving pharmaceuticals and unique organisms are not the only things at stake from this untested, risky experiment (“Race to the bottom”, May 3rd).As recently as one year ago, scientists on board Schmidt Ocean Institute’s philanthropic research vessel, Falkor (too), deployed a new technology, the mTail, or miniature trace analyser in situ logger, to search for oxygen in areas of the ocean where scientists haven’t detected any before. The device detected a surprising amount of oxygen, a discovery that has implications for how these areas of the ocean help regulate our planet’s greenhouse gases.The ocean is critical to human existence, and the deep sea is unlikely to recover from mining on human time scales. Battery innovation is leapfrogging. Researchers are already pursuing more sustainable types of batteries that require no seabed minerals. Cries to mine the deep sea sound as archaic as “drill, baby, drill.” Indeed, no one has dared drill since the Deepwater Horizon spill in 2010 because the costs and risks are so great, and the equipment to do it is exceedingly expensive and complex.And we have barely begun to explore the possibilities of reusing, repurposing and recycling batteries, which studies have shown could significantly reduce the amount of mining we need to do. Or better yet, think of the idea that we would be better served not by bigger or more electric cars but by effective, accessible transit systems.The international community has the opportunity to agree to a moratorium on deep-sea mining, as 33 countries and counting are advocating before the international body that actually has legal jurisdiction on this issue, and which is gathering this summer to consider it. Let’s ensure that decisions about the ocean are made with an eye to the future rather than a backslide toward our extractive and destructive past.Wendy SchmidtPresident and co-FounderSchmidt Ocean InstituteSchmidt Family FoundationSanta Barbara, CaliforniaI enjoyed your article on the increasing number of young men in Britain who are turning towards Catholicism (“Altered minds”, May 10th). You referred to Graham Greene’s faith. Britain’s other great 20th-century Catholic novelist was Evelyn Waugh, and the article mentioned Farm Street Church in Mayfair. In “Brideshead Revisited” this is where Rex Mottram is sent for Catholic instruction. Discussing papal infallibility, the priest asks Mottram what would happen if the pope said it was going to rain, but it didn’t? Mottram replies, “I suppose it would be sort of raining spiritually, only we were too sinful to see it.”Paul Ferguson Englefield Green, SurreyThe illustration of a guinea pig with headphones in your article on research into damaged ears was magnificent (“Uneasy listening”, May 10th). I was less pleased to learn that scientists had exposed the animals to Adele’s song, “I Miss You”, long enough to hurt their hearing.Guinea pigs are formidable biters. I hope they bit the scientists hard, thereby demonstrating sound judgment.Ruth MorssCambridge, Massachusetts