United States - America’s immigration detention centres are at capacity

A visit to the second biggest, in Georgia, shows what that looks like. IN APRIL Todd Lyons, the acting director of Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), lamented that it takes too long to deport illegal immigrants. At the Border Security Expo in Phoenix he told a crowd of startup bosses vying for government contracts that a better deportation system would function more like Amazon, the tech giant whose delivery drivers zigzag the country at record speed. “Like Prime, but with human beings,” he said.His agents are scrambling to make that happen. In Nashville ICE teamed up with highway patrol to arrest 196 immigrants in just one week in May. In San Diego, New York and other big cities agents are suddenly picking up far more people at scheduled hearings in courthouses. But what happens after the arrests is another matter. To carry out Donald Trump’s mass deportations the government must hold immigrants while they wait for court dates or deportation flights. Four months into the president’s term, detention centres are full.The newest data released by ICE show a drop in the number of immigrants in detention for the first time since January. The fall is modest—from 49,184 on May 4th to 48,870 on May 18th—but indicates that the administration may have hit a bottleneck. Congress allocated funds for 41,500 beds this year, almost 20% fewer than the current number of detainees. In early May the Senate appropriations committee warned Kristi Noem, the secretary of homeland security, that she is set to run out of money before the fiscal year ends. To reach Amazonian efficiency, or even to continue booking people at the current pace, Mr Trump needs more funds and more space.At Stewart Detention Centre, America’s second-biggest, overcrowding is causing chaos. The constellation of low-slung buildings in rural Georgia has roughly 1,750 beds, but on any given day in April the number of people living there was closer to 2,200. One room which housed 30 people in rows of bunk beds last autumn now has over 70. Newcomers sleep on plastic sheets on the floor. Women are stealing toilet paper because there aren’t enough tampons.The usual order is crumbling because guards are overwhelmed, says a detainee who has been there for months. In normal times uniforms distinguish between tiers of inmates—red for ones who committed crimes, khaki for ones who didn’t—but now people are being dressed in the wrong colours. Enough drugs were being smuggled inside in hair scrunchies that the facility recently banned them. Detainees report not getting medicines for conditions like high blood pressure. A study by a trio of watchdog groups found that 95% of the 52 deaths in detention centres between 2017 and 2021 were due to medical negligence. As conditions worsened the federal government closed the Office of the Immigration Detention Ombudsman, which gave detainees advocates on the inside.The Trump administration is on the hunt for a fix. In May a detention centre in New Jersey reopened, after an eight-year lull, at twice its previous capacity. Many more will be needed. The government put out an emergency request for companies to bid on building them, but getting new facilities running could take months. In the meantime plans are under way to convert part of a military base in El Paso into a camp where immigrants sleep in tents; a shuttered women’s prison near San Francisco known as the “rape club”, after half a dozen staff were charged or convicted of sexual assault, might be repurposed.The House’s new budget bill gives the administration $59bn to play with. The government reckons that should be enough to double the number of beds. But in the short term Mr Trump may quietly resort to the catch-and-release strategy he chastised his predecessor for. ■Stay on top of American politics with The US in brief, our daily newsletter with fast analysis of the most important political news, and Checks and Balance, a weekly note from our Lexington columnist that examines the state of American democracy and the issues that matter to voters.