United States - How young voters helped to put Trump in the White House

And why millennials and Gen Zers are already leaving the president. THE 2024 election unfolded like a political thriller, replete with a last-minute candidate change, a cover-up, assassination attempts and ultimately the triumphant return of a convicted felon. But amid the spectacle, a quieter transformation took place. For the first time, millennials and Gen Z, people born between 1981 and 2006, comprised a plurality of the electorate. Their drift towards Donald Trump shaped the outcome.Millennials and Gen Z are the most diverse and educated generations in American history, traits long thought to favour the Democratic Party. Yet a new report from Catalist, a left-leaning political-data firm, shows that although Democrats still won a majority of young voters, their long-standing advantage over the Republican Party was reduced by nearly two-thirds. In 2024 Kamala Harris’s margin of victory among these voters was 12 points smaller than was Joe Biden’s in 2020, a bigger swing than for any other cohort (see chart 1). The exodus was caused in large part by non-whites and helped propel Mr Trump back into the White House. But many of these voters lack firm partisan loyalties. They are still up for grabs.Younger voters appear highly sensitive to economic pressures. They earn less than their elders and are less likely to own their home or have substantial savings. America’s overall unemployment rate was a healthy 4.2% in November 2024. But the figure was nearly double that for 20- to 24-year-olds and roughly triple that for 18- and 19-year-olds. Younger voters were more likely to say that the economy was the most important issue to them and substantially less likely to cite immigration.Catalist’s numbers are only available six months after the election, and their analysis avoids many of the pitfalls that plague pre-election polling, which underestimated Mr Trump for the third consecutive presidential election. The average American voter swung towards Mr Trump by six points in 2024. The lion’s share of that shift came from the youngest voting-age generations. Gen Z and millennial voters preferred Mr Biden by 19 points in 2020.Had these two cohorts voted as they did in 2020, Ms Harris would have won the popular vote by 2.8 points, rather than losing it narrowly to Mr Trump. And though turnout fell by around two points nationwide, it fell by double that among 18- to 29-year-olds. This also hurt Ms Harris, since she attracted a majority of the young vote, even if by declining margins.Most worrisome for Democrats is their clear loss of purchase on younger black and Latino voters. Though Democrats have long hoped that a more diverse young electorate would help tilt the political map in their favour, the latest data show that it was those voters who revolted most fiercely. Among 18- to 44-year-olds, white voters swung towards Mr Trump by 4.6 points, while their black counterparts shifted by 14.6 points and Latinos by a sobering 22.6 points. The impact was all the greater because just under a third of millennials and Gen Z are non-white, a higher percentage than for older generations.One reason all groups of young people swung against the Democrats in 2024 seems to be their perceptions of the economy. In polling conducted by YouGov/The Economist before the election, 18- to 29-year-olds gave Mr Biden a net rating of minus 23 percentage points on his handling of inflation, for example. Indeed, The Economist’s analysis of the Consumer Expenditure Surveys found that young people’s consumption habits meant they were exposed to higher rates of inflation in 2021 and 2022, when prices were rising at their fastest (see chart 2). The Fed reports that used cars and fuel make up a larger portion of young people’s (and especially Latinos’) spending. Prices for those goods rose dramatically in 2021 and 2022.Yet economic stress is not the only plausible explanation for young voters’ desertion of the Democratic Party. They are also more likely to consume news from non-traditional sources. YouGov’s pre-election polling showed that six in ten young people had learned something new about Mr Trump from social media; one in four had heard new information about him from podcasts. In the final days of the campaign Mr Trump went on a tour of “bro podcasts”, fishing for viral moments. Social media were also a hotbed for left-wing criticism of Mr Biden and Ms Harris, especially of their handling of the conflict in Gaza. Analysis by Blue Rose Research, a Democratic firm, found that voters who got their news from TikTok were substantially more likely to switch to the Republican Party, even after controlling for other factors.Perhaps the only good news for Democrats is that millennial and Gen Z voters appear persuadable. Already, data from YouGov/The Economist show that many of the gains Mr Trump made for his party among the youngest voters have begun to diminish. After a chaotic first few months in office the president’s net approval has fallen by around 13 points nationwide. Among the under-30s it has plunged 25 points, from net positive four to a net negative 21 (see chart 3).Research by Columbia University found that events in voters’ early adulthood have an outsize effect on their long-term partisanship. Older millennials aged into the electorate against the backdrop of the financial crisis and Occupy Wall Street. But for the youngest voters formative political events have been more diverse and disruptive. They have come of age during covid-19 lockdowns, cost-of-living shocks and the rise of and backlash against wokeness. How they will make ideological sense of the whiplash is difficult to predict. ■Stay on top of American politics with The US in brief, our daily newsletter with fast analysis of the most important political news, and Checks and Balance, a weekly note from our Lexington columnist that examines the state of American democracy and the issues that matter to voters.