The Americas - The king “loves” Canada. Many Albertans want out

The push for a referendum on Albertan independence is speeding up. “The true north is indeed strong and free.” If King Charles’s remarks on Canada’s sovereignty sounded familiar, that is because officials in Mark Carney’s new government wrote them. On May 27th the king delivered the throne speech in his capacity as head of state, opening Parliament—a task usually performed by Canada’s governor-general. The last monarch to do it was his mother, Queen Elizabeth, in 1977. The king was drafted in to rally Canadians to Mr Carney’s banner (his brother runs the household of Prince William, the king’s son and heir), as Canada’s prime minister settles into his stand-off with the pugnacious president of the United States, Donald Trump.But for about a third of the 5m residents of the oil-rich province of Alberta, the royal rhetoric will have rung hollow. These Albertans feel neither strong nor free but constrained, in particular by the environmental predilections of their rulers in Ottawa which stop Albertan crude from flowing as freely as it might. Their dormant independence movement has been reinvigorated by fury across Conservative-voting Alberta at the Liberal Party’s recent turnaround election win.Within hours of Mr Carney’s victory on April 28th, Alberta’s right-wing premier, Danielle Smith, announced that she planned to lower the number of petition signatures needed to trigger referendums, including a vote on Alberta’s secession. Separatist groups like the Republican Party of Alberta and the Alberta Prosperity Project began scrambling for the 177,000 names needed, down from 600,000.Ms Smith insists she is making an earnest attempt to allay Albertan anger, not to guide her province out of the federation. She admits to thinking a referendum might help her politically by putting the question of independence to rest while fending off the re-energised right-wing of her United Conservative Party. “I can read polls just as well as anybody and see that 37% of people [in Alberta] have given up on Canada,” she says. “I take that very seriously and so should the decision-maker in Ottawa.”Mr Carney has seen this coming. He is familiar with the results of high-stakes referendums, having guided the Bank of England through Brexit as its governor. He has already offered to approve energy projects in two years rather than five, and said he will use national-interest rules to speed up development even further. Mere words, according to Ms Smith. She wants guarantees that oil and gas pipelines will be built immediately, particularly to the Pacific and the Asian market beyond.The path to independence is technically fraught. Federal laws passed after Quebec came within 60,000 votes of seceding 30 years ago dictate that any bid for provincial separation can proceed only when a “clear question” leads to a “clear majority”. Were such a question asked and answered in the affirmative, complicated negotiations on divisions of assets would follow.Nancy Southern, the boss of ATCO, a large Canadian energy conglomerate, says the mere possibility of Alberta’s separation is already driving away investment. Potential partners in Japan and South Korea are asking pointed questions, she told shareholders on May 14th: “What are the rules going to be? What’s the currency going to be? Is there security around this? Who’s going to trade with this? How do we get to tidewater? How do we get our product to our country?”The province’s 45 indigenous groups don’t much like the idea either. Their relationship with the government is based on treaties with the British Crown, and they insist they would remain sovereign nations within an independent Alberta. “You would have a Swiss cheese of a province, at best, if they did pull away,” says Chief Ouray Crowfoot of the Siksika First Nation.None of that is stopping anti-Ottawa sentiment that has existed for decades from curdling into anti-Canada convictions. “We don’t have anything in common with anybody east of Saskatchewan,” says Alton Wood, referring to the prairie province to Alberta’s immediate east.Mr Wood was one of about 500 avowed separatists who gathered at a casino banquet hall in Red Deer on May 24th, about 140km (90 miles) north of Calgary, for a town-hall meeting held by the Republican Party of Alberta. Jonathan White, who runs a construction company in the central Albertan town of Springbrook, says taxes—particularly Canada’s industrial carbon tax—are smothering his business and nudging him towards supporting secession. “If the rest of Canada is stomping on us, what else do we have left to do?”Naheed Nenshi, who leads Alberta’s left-wing New Democratic Party, sees parallels with Brexit. Ms Smith’s attempt to hold her conservative coalition together by gambling that a referendum will go her way looks to him like David Cameron’s doomed attempt to secure his Conservative Party’s future by doing the same in Britain. “She is exactly following the David Cameron script, but I don’t know if she’s read to the end of the play.”Indeed, there are hints that Ms Smith may be repeating the mistake of thinking she can control a rising populist movement. Data released on May 23rd by Léger, a pollster, found that 47% of Albertans support independence, with 48% saying they would vote against it. Those are Brexitesque margins.Ms Smith says she aims to avoid a referendum entirely by compelling the Carney government to stick to its word and make it easier to get Alberta’s resources out of the ground and into pipelines. “If I’m successful, then that will mean there may not be a question.” If she’s not, she will have to live with the consequences. King Charles and Mr Carney have seen this all before. ■