The Americas - Why Latin American Surrealism is surging in a down art market

Works by women in particular offer collectors a sure thing at a better price. In 1956 the painter Diego Rivera stated that three of the world’s most important female artists lived in Mexico. (His wife, Frida Kahlo, had just died.) He was talking about European émigrée Surrealists: Remedios Varo of Spain, Leonora Carrington of England and Alice Rahon of France.Unlike Kahlo, whose face appears on cushions and in baby books, Varo, Carrington and Rahon are little known outside the art world. But demand for their work has driven surging prices that collectors are willing to pay for works by female Surrealists, particularly those from Latin America.Between 2017 and 2023 total sales of works by the eight major female Surrealists increased in value by an average of 150% every year, according to ArtTactic, an arts consultancy based in London (see chart). In 2024 sales jumped by 159%, mainly thanks to Carrington and Varo, together up 490%. Argentine collector Eduardo Costantini paid $28.5m for a Carrington, “Les Distractions de Dagobert”, coming close to Salvador Dali’s top price. All this amid a slumping global art market. Overall sales were down by 27% last year.The boom has its roots in the 1940s, when many European artists fled to Mexico to escape fascism. André Breton, a French founder of Surrealism, hailed the country as “the Surrealist place par excellence”. A magical mentality has long been embedded in indigenous Mexican culture, according to Janet Kaplan, an art historian, exemplified by the sugar-coated confectionery skulls given to children for the Day of the Dead. Where they had been peripheral in Paris, perhaps crowded out by male peers, once in Mexico Varo, Carrington and Rahon rose to become major artists.As the value of everything from the dollar to tech stocks shifts, collectors have focused on established work. “Ultra-contemporary” art was hot in 2022, but prices dipped by 38% in 2024, falling more than the overall market. In contrast, a painting by René Magritte was sold in New York for $121m in 2024, a record both for the artist and Surrealist work. For collectors who want a sure thing, but who cannot afford the most famous pieces, the female Surrealists offer a discounted way to hedge risk, says Lindsay Dewar of ArtTactic.Nationalist-billionaire ambition also pushes up prices. Mr Costantini founded the Museum of Latin American Art in Buenos Aires and wants pieces to fill it. His bidding wars can send prices sky-high. After paying a record price for a Varo in 2020, he said: “It can take 50 years to see [such superlative works] again.”Institutional recognition has also played a role. In 2021 the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York put on an exhibition which expanded Surrealism’s canon beyond western Europe. It included pieces by Carrington, Varo and Rahon.Major works are rarely sold, but on May 12th Christie’s in New York auctioned Varo’s “Revelation” for $6.22m, a new record for the artist. The painting depicts gears of a clock scattered amid a glowing disc, representing Einstein’s relativity. Born from geopolitical tumult, Surrealism focused on the subconscious and otherworldliness. “It’s 100 years later,” says Ms Dewar, “and things kind of feel the same”. ■Sign up to El Boletín, our subscriber-only newsletter on Latin America, to understand the forces shaping a fascinating and complex region.