United States - Demand for American degrees is sinking

Trump’s war on universities is driving talent away. SOME OF AMERICA’S most valuable companies were built by people who came to America as students. Elon Musk arrived to study physics at the University of Pennsylvania. Patrick and John Collison moved from Ireland to attend MIT and Harvard, respectively, before founding Stripe, a digital-payments company. All told, more than half of America’s billion-dollar startups were founded by at least one immigrant; a quarter of them had a founder who arrived in the country as a student.That pipeline of talent is now under heavy pressure. On May 22nd the Trump administration abruptly stripped Harvard University of its ability to enroll foreign students. A judge blocked the move the following day. But the administration only tightened its squeeze: on May 27th it suspended all new visa interviews for foreign students who were hoping to study in America. Officials say the pause is temporary while it reviews how applicants’ social-media posts are screened. But the damage could outlast the policy.Attracting global talent has long been one of American academia’s greatest strengths. The country draws more international students than any other; over the past two decades the share of foreign students has nearly doubled, reaching almost 6% in 2023. Most pursue degrees in fields such as science, engineering and maths. Nearly a third come from India; a quarter come from China.America’s top private universities attract the lion’s share of foreign talent. International students make up 14% of the intake at the country’s 158 most selective research institutions—more than double the national average. At the dozen “Ivy-plus” universities—the Ivy League and peers such as Stanford and MIT—the share reaches 28%. Columbia and Harvard, two institutions that President Donald Trump has recently targeted in his broader assault on elite universities, rely very heavily on international enrolment, at 40% and 28% respectively (see chart 1).Public universities, although less exposed in terms of headcount, face other risks. They tend to depend more on foreign tuition, which is often several times higher than the rates charged to local students, for revenue and lack the endowments that cushion private institutions.Prospective students are already looking elsewhere. Studyportals, an online directory for degree programmes around the world, says clicks on American courses are now at their lowest level since the covid-19 pandemic (see chart 2). Weekly page views halved between January 5th and the end of April. First-quarter traffic to American courses was down by more than 20% year on year. The biggest drop was from India, where interest fell by 40%. The data suggest that British universities will be the most likely beneficiaries.The financial stakes are high. In the 2023-24 academic year foreign students added $43.8bn to America’s economy, mostly in Democrat-leaning areas, according to the National Association of International Educators, a non-profit education group. They also supported jobs at universities and other sectors, such as food services and health care.But the heaviest cost to America will be in talent. Around three-quarters of international PhD students say they intend to stay in America after graduating. Blocking the next generation of students would succeed in punishing the Ivies. But over time it is America’s edge in science, business and innovation that will suffer. ■To read a more detailed story visit our Graphic detail page.Stay on top of American politics with The US in brief, our daily newsletter with fast analysis of the most important political news, and Checks and Balance, a weekly note from our Lexington columnist that examines the state of American democracy and the issues that matter to voters.