Briefing - Nayib Bukele is devolving from tech-savvy reformer to autocrat

El Salvador’s president is young, MAGA-friendly and ruthless. THE KNOCK on the door came at 11pm on a Sunday evening, as Ruth López, a lawyer and anti-corruption investigator at Cristosal, an NGO, was getting ready for bed. Police claimed her car had been involved in an accident, but when she stepped outside they arrested her on suspicion of embezzling government funds in a job she left over a decade ago. In a recording Ms López is heard saying, “The only reason I am being detained is that I am a defender of human rights and I work for an NGO that makes the government uncomfortable.” Most observers agree. That makes her the first high-profile political prisoner incarcerated by Nayib Bukele, El Salvador’s president.Mr Bukele has never had much respect for civil liberties. He became president in 2019 by promising to rid El Salvador of paralysing gang violence. To that end he has locked up some 85,000 suspected gang members without trial. Salvadorans have accepted Mr Bukele’s authoritarian streak as a means to an end, as murder rates have plummeted. Mr Bukele himself revels in his tough-guy image, calling himself “the world’s coolest dictator”.Mr Bukele also has fans abroad, including his American counterpart. After he agreed to jail prisoners deported from the United States, Donald Trump welcomed him to the White House in April, calling him “one hell of a president”. Various American dignitaries, including Marco Rubio, the secretary of state, and Kristi Noem, the secretary of homeland security, have visited El Salvador to lionise him. Even as the Trump administration has been cheerleading, Mr Bukele has been lashing out. Whereas previously he rode roughshod over civil liberties in the name of suppressing gangs, now he seems to be doing so simply to silence critics like Ms López. Journalists, ngos, even supplicant farmers—anyone who embarrasses him faces fierce repression. Mr Bukele’s carefully crafted image as a young, innovative, can-do reformer, all baseball caps and bitcoin, is wearing away, to reveal just another thin-skinned Latin American dictator.Mr Bukele’s political party is called New Ideas, and when he won the presidency at the age of 37, he seemed to have lots of them. He promised El Salvador’s 6.3m people flashy infrastructure, big investments from cryptocurrency firms and, above all, a respite from violence. On the last score, at least, he delivered. After 87 people were murdered in a single weekend in 2022, Mr Bukele declared a “state of exception”, which allows the police to hold people without trial. As arrests soared, crime plunged.The official murder rate has plummeted from 51 per 100,000 in 2018 to 1.9 last year, lower than in the United States (see chart 1). The government massages these figures somewhat by excluding those killed by the police, or in prison or whose bodies are discovered long after their deaths. But the two main gangs, Barrio 18 and Mara Salvatrucha 13, have been dismantled. “I used to see dead bodies on the street, like, right there, in front of me,” says José Francisco, a taxi driver who lives in a once dangerous suburb of San Salvador, the capital. “I could never have worked at night as I do now.”El Salvador has the world’s highest incarceration rate, at 1,700 people per 100,000 (see chart 2). In 2023 Mr Bukele opened the “Terrorism Confinement Centre” (CECOT), with a capacity of 40,000. Inmates are stripped, shaved and squished together like sardines in huge windowless cells. Human-rights groups say many innocent people have ended up inside, arrested for no more than a tattoo. No one has been tried, even though Gustavo Villatoro, the security minister, told The Economist two years ago that trials would be complete by now. (Mr Villatoro has also said that the only way out of CECOT is in a coffin.)Throughout all this Mr Bukele has enjoyed sky-high approval ratings, of close to 90%. That is in part because he has dominated the national conversation, abetted by slick public relations, state media and online trolls. But in recent months it has become clear that his war on the gangs was not quite what he claimed. In May El Faro, an investigative outlet, published videos featuring two leaders of the 18th Street Revolutionaries, another gang. They describe a series of pacts with Mr Bukele stretching back to 2014, when he was running for mayor of San Salvador. The men claim that Mr Bukele’s party paid them $250,000 to drum up votes for him in the mayoral race. After he became president, they allege, there were further deals to suppress the murder rate and enforce curfews during the covid-19 pandemic. The main video has been viewed 850,000 times—750,000 more than the norm for El Faro.Other sources, including American legal proceedings, paint a similar picture. In 2021 the US Treasury imposed sanctions on Osiris Luna, Mr Bukele’s prison director, for his links to gangs. He is alleged to have given imprisoned gang leaders time with sex workers and mobile phones in exchange for helping Mr Bukele.Although reports have long circulated that the police crackdown of 2022 marked a rupture between Mr Bukele and the gangs, there are indications of further contact after that. At least two gang members have since been released from prison unexpectedly and without explanation. One, Elmer Canales Rivera, aka Crook, who was wanted in the United States, was captured in 2023 in Mexico when he was supposed to be behind bars in El Salvador. El Faro reported that officials had let him out and helped him escape to Guatemala. “It has become clear that El Salvador’s security model is not what the world thought it was,” says Claudia Ortiz, one of only three opposition members in the 60-seat Legislative Assembly.Rather than refute El Faro’s claims, the government has responded by issuing arrest warrants for three of the journalists involved. A law Mr Bukele pushed through in 2022 allows jail terms of 10-15 years for those who transmit or reproduce messages “created or allegedly created” by gangs that could foster “anxiety and panic”. The journalists have fled the country. Then, on May 18th, came Ms López’s arrest.Two days later the Legislative Assembly used an emergency procedure to rush through a “foreign-agents law”, which requires people or organisations receiving money from abroad to apply for permission to do so and to pay a 30% tax on it. The sweeping law, which resembles measures adopted in Nicaragua and Russia, gives the government discretion to ban “foreign agents” it does not like and, for good measure, prohibits them from pursuing activities with “political ends”.It is “an instrument of persecution to drown civil society and generate fear”, says Verónica Reyna of Passionist Social Service, an NGO in San Salvador that, like many others, gets some funds from abroad. It documented 538 assaults on activists and journalists in 2024, up 136% from 2023.Mr Bukele is becoming more repressive in other ways, too. He has promised spiffy new highways to ease El Salvador’s traffic congestion, but construction has barely begun. After the threat of landslides led to road closures in late April, intensifying the jams, he declared he was offering Salvadorans a week of free bus journeys. When the owners of eight private transport companies balked, he had them arrested. One later died in custody. In a similar vein, the authorities have responded to unhappiness about the repeal of a ban on mining by harrying environmental activists.On May 12th it was a group of farmers who were targeted. They had gathered outside Mr Bukele’s residence to petition against their impending eviction. Military police brutally dispersed them. Two supporters—a pastor and a lawyer—have been detained. Like other prisoners, they are not allowed to see their families, who must pay $7.50 a day for their meals.In the village they are from, near the town of Santa Tecla, people are in shock. No one wants to give their name for fear of repercussions for themselves or the prisoners. “We thought the president would send out a delegation to talk to us, not the police,” says a man sitting on his porch as chickens wander around. “I don’t think people would go out again now.”They are not alone. “People are now afraid of us rather than the gangs,” laments a former policeman. A journalist explains how he does not dare sleep in his own home. A worker at an NGO debates whether to leave the country. It is reminiscent of more run-of-the-mill autocracies in the region, such as Nicaragua or Venezuela.Mr Bukele’s deal with Mr Trump to imprison deportees from the United States at CECOT (run by the same Mr Luna who is under American sanctions) is another sore spot. It is awkward for the president of a country of migrants to lock up deportees—especially to help someone who once called El Salvador “a shithole”. Worse, one of the people he is detaining on Mr Trump’s behalf is an apparently blameless Salvadoran, Kilmar Ábrego García.Some suspect Mr Bukele has ulterior motives. He seems keen to secure the return from the United States of jailed Salvadoran gang members—odd for a supposedly inveterate enemy of gangsters. The Trump administration has sent back 23 so far, including one who had been expected to testify in American courts about his past alliance with Mr Bukele’s government.At any rate, there are many boons Mr Bukele could have requested in addition to the $6m the Trump administration is paying. He could have pushed for better treatment of Salvadorans, who are the second-biggest group of undocumented immigrants in the United States after Mexicans. He might have negotiated some sort of exemption from the United States’ proposed 3.5% tax on remittances, which are equivalent to a quarter of GDP in El Salvador,Perhaps Mr Bukele’s biggest problem is the economy, which in 2023 surpassed security to become Salvadorans’ biggest preoccupation, according to the polls. Like others in Central America, it relies heavily on remittances and services. By making El Salvador safer and stamping out extortion, Mr Bukele has definitely given it a boost. Google arrived last year to help with the government’s “digital transformation”. Tether, a cryptocurrency exchange, announced it would move its headquarters to El Salvador this year. Tourism has boomed, with a record 3.9m people arriving in 2024, up 40% from 2019. In El Tunco, a beach town, bars and restaurants are multiplying to cater to the many American visitors.But the improvement has not been as dramatic as some had hoped. A study in 2016 estimated that gang violence shaved 16% off the economy each year. Yet annual GDP growth, which had hovered between 2% and 2.5% before the pandemic, rose only to 3.5% in 2023 before falling to 2.6% last year. This year the IMF predicts growth of just 2.5%, less than in Honduras or Guatemala. Private investment is less than in Nicaragua, a fully-fledged dictatorship. Businessmen say they are fearful of arbitrary measures from the government.Government debt is a worrying 88% of GDP—up ten percentage points since Mr Bukele came to power. He tends to resort to handouts when rattled: this year alone, in addition to free transport when traffic became especially snarled, he has raised the minimum wage and waived electricity and water bills for a month. This profligacy, along with the government’s investments in cryptocurrency, dismays the markets. Instead in February El Salvador agreed a $1.4bn loan with the IMF, which wants the government to curb its exposure to cryptocurrency and to trim spending.Mr Bukele has duly produced an “austerity budget” this year. That entails cuts to health and education, which will not go down well. As it is, the percentage of the population living in poverty grew from 27% in 2019 to 30% in 2023. The problems are particularly evident in health care. A doctor says everything from medicines to hand soap is lacking in public hospitals. In some cases medical staff are reduced to simply changing the gauze on a wound rather than properly cleaning it because they lack the necessary supplies, he says. The shortages naturally lead to griping. “I take my mother to appointments and see it for myself,” grumbles one man.The economy’s travails are all the more galling to many given the evident prosperity of many of Mr Bukele’s inner circle. His family has reportedly acquired 34 properties in El Salvador worth around $9m since he became president. The US Treasury imposed sanctions on Mr Luna, the prison director, in part for embezzling millions of dollars in government funds and misusing pandemic-relief supplies. Last year, the government spent $1.4m to buy land for a new presidential residence next to Mr Bukele’s private home in a grand gated community called Los Sueños (The Dreams). “Why would the next president live next to Mr Bukele’s house?” asks a Salvadoran. The purchase confirms what many already thought: that Mr Bukele has no plans to leave the presidency.Salvadorans increasingly perceive that “the government has not performed satisfactorily in any other area” besides security, says Ms Ortiz. How this will affect Mr Bukele’s popularity is hard to predict. He has consistently enjoyed approval ratings above 80%, although there is some doubt over their accuracy, since the majority of the population also tell pollsters they are afraid to express their opinion. Recently his popularity seems to have slid a little (see chart 3).Even small dips are significant, says Noah Bullock of Cristosal, since Mr Bukele’s apologists use his sky-high support to justify his near-absolute power. Previous dips in support seem to have been to tied to spikes in prices. This time, some analysts detect the beginnings of a more gradual erosion, tied to the cycle of embarrassing news and subsequent repression that has been under way this year. “He started well, fighting gangs. But along the way he decided he didn’t want to let go of power,” says the man from Santa Tecla.Some fear that, rather than try to regain popularity, Mr Bukele may find it simpler to repress dissent. “He will become more dangerous…like a beast about to be captured or killed who bites and lashes out,” says the former policeman.If so, Mr Bukele certainly has the tools he needs to preserve himself in power. In the course of his crackdown on crime, he has amassed extraordinary control. By the time he declared the state of exception in 2022, he had already won over the army and police with lavish benefits, secured a super-majority in the Legislative Assembly and slashed the number of lawmakers and municipalities to the benefit of his party.Mr Bukele has used his legislative power to stack the courts with yes-men. In 2024 the newly domesticated courts found a way round the constitutional ban on a second consecutive term in power. That paved the way for his re-election last year, which will keep him in office until 2029. The Legislative Assembly has also made amending the constitution much easier. Whereas changes used to have to be approved by two consecutive sessions of the assembly, with an election in between, they can now be made in a single sitting.A series of seemingly benign laws are “traps” entrenching Mr Bukele’s authority, says Sergio Arauz, a journalist at El Faro. In December Human Rights Watch, an international monitor, criticised a data-protection law that could erase critical reporting. The state of exception, which suspends all due process, is in its fourth year.The troubling reality is that there is little to restrain Mr Bukele’s worst tendencies. He holds untrammelled power. Civil society is cowed. “There is no brake on him left; we are alone,” says Juan Meléndez of the Netherlands Institute for Multiparty Democracy, another NGO. “What happened to Ruth can happen to any of us.” ■