United States - Why would Texas Republicans object to conservative, pro-family developers?

Because they’re Muslim, of course. A few steps past torn and twisted steel beams from the destroyed World Trade Centre, the George W. Bush Presidential Library in Dallas, Texas, projects clips of Mr Bush speaking in the days after the attacks of September 11th 2001. In different settings he is by turns sorrowful, fierce and resolute, yet the video shows he also struck another note, not just of tolerance but of goodwill towards people some Americans might immediately suspect as enemies. Six days after the attacks Mr Bush spoke at a mosque, the Islamic Centre of Washington, DC. “These acts of violence against innocents violate the fundamental tenets of the Islamic faith,” he informed the country. Islam, he said, “is peace”.“That really helped things for us here in America,” recalls Yasir Qadhi, the resident scholar of the East Plano Islamic Centre, a mosque in Plano, a suburb north-east of Dallas. He chuckles at his own wistfulness for Mr Bush’s leadership, but he has reason for it. The crude incentives of today’s politics are pointing the inheritors of Mr Bush’s political machine in Texas in the opposite direction. Intra-party rivalry is fanning fears that Dr Qadhi’s mosque, known by its acronym, EPIC, is out to impose Islamic law in the state.It all started, of course, online. In February the state’s Republican governor, Greg Abbott, retweeted a post from a right-wing influencer ringing alarms about a housing subdivision, with the regrettably grandiose name “EPIC City”, that EPIC wanted to build. “Sharia law is not allowed in Texas,” the governor wrote. “Nor are sharia cities.” At least six investigations have since been opened into the mosque’s plans, including by the Texas Rangers and the Texas Funeral Service Commission, though no one has produced any evidence that anyone intended to impose sharia law, or to break the law at EPIC City in any other way. The mosque has not yet even applied for permits to build, a process that, ideally, should ensure that any developer would follow the law.One might imagine reasons to resist developing the 402 acres purchased for the subdivision, now a cornfield edged with purple thistle and white Queen Anne’s lace, about 40 miles from Dallas: the impact on the environment, say, or the strain on sewage and water systems. But Texas’s government is practised at dispensing with such worries to accommodate the state’s population boom. Its easy permitting ways, and lower housing costs and rates of homelessness, are rightly the envy of “Abundance” Democrats who bemoan restrictions in states dominated by Democrats.With such concerns set aside, one might think Texas’s pro-development, conservative, pro-faith, pro-family government would be particularly delighted with a development by a conservative, pro-faith, pro-family community. “There’s nothing more Republican and Texan,” says Dr Qadhi. The community’s goal, he says, is to create a neighbourhood where families can live close to facilities for elderly parents and grandparents. The plan is for more than a thousand homes, a mosque, a school and fields for sport.The competition to condemn the subdivision is the kind of thing that happens in America’s one-party states, where politicians worry far more about primary challenges from more extreme candidates than about winning general elections. In Texas, Senator John Cornyn has a primary race on his hands against Ken Paxton, the state attorney-general. Mr Cornyn, who first won the office in 2002 after Mr Bush endorsed him, has recast himself as a stalwart supporter of Donald Trump. But Mr Paxton, who tried to overturn the 2020 election and has, like Mr Trump, weathered impeachment, is more beloved on the Trumpist right. Recent polls place Mr Paxton well ahead among Republicans.Mr Paxton called for a state investigation of the development in March; Mr Cornyn then urged a federal investigation, warning the development “could violate the Constitutional rights of Jewish and Christian Texans”, and the Department of Justice obliged. (The development’s planners say it will be open to people of all faiths—anything else would violate fair housing laws.) Mr Cornyn’s campaign has tried to score points by noting that the mosque is employing a lawyer, Dan Cogdell, who also defended Mr Paxton in his impeachment.Like leaders of the mosque, Mr Cogdell says he has been doxxed and threatened. He professes astonishment at the anger he is encountering, which he says has exceeded what he experienced when defending people accused of murder. “I thought we had inched past some of our guttural reactions post-9/11,” he says. “If this was a Baptist church in Red Oak Texas none of this shit would be happening.”Dr Qadhi says the uproar has shown that Muslims in Texas need to cultivate political allies, an undertaking he says many in his community have resisted because it risks raising more suspicions of nefarious influence. “Damned if you do, damned if you don’t,” he says. Born in Texas, Dr Qadhi argues Muslims should exercise the political rights guaranteed to all Americans, and he notes people of other faiths, such as Catholics, have successfully weathered the struggle for acceptance. “You can’t stop progress,” he says. “We’re just a part of the American process here.”Maybe he is right. But that process can run in reverse. The Bush library, more of a shrine to the aspirations of the 43rd president than an unflinching appraisal of his record, reminds visitors that he wanted to promote democracy, development and human rights abroad, and, at home, to turn more immigrants into citizens and to enrich the education of American children, in addition to fostering comity and kindness. Part of the legacy of the September 11th attacks, and of Mr Bush’s own mistakes in their wake, is that his party, and his country, are moving further away from realising so many of those hopes. ■Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.