Asia - If India chokes less, it will fry more

Pollution may have shielded it from the worst of global warming. That will change. WARMING MIGHT be a global phenomenon, but temperatures around the world have not risen uniformly over the past few decades. The poles and high latitudes have warmed faster than places nearer the equator. Regional differences in elevation and vegetation lead to more variation. But one region stands out as a clear anomaly on the global map: South Asia.Over the past 40 years South Asia has warmed far more slowly than elsewhere in the world—temperatures in the region have risen by around 0.09°C per decade, compared with 0.30°C over the rest of the world’s land mass and 0.23°C for places at a similar latitude. Scientists are not yet sure how to explain the South Asian “warming hole”,  but there is strong evidence that both smog and changes in irrigation have played a big part. If so, then as pollution wanes and the expansion of irrigation slows, that will change. Dirty air kills millions of people in the region each year; cleaning it up is imperative. But that clean-up may well cause a dangerous surge in warming.South Asia is already a hot place. The time between April and June, before the monsoon, is typically the warmest. In these months, temperatures on the Indo-Gangetic plain—the area that spreads from eastern Pakistan, across North India and into Bangladesh—can regularly exceed 40°C . Every year more than 40% of people experiencing very strong or extreme heat stress, a measure that includes the degree to which humidity makes high temperatures more dangerous, live in South Asia. High levels of heat stress can be fatal, especially for the old and unwell.One explanation for why South Asia has avoided the full brunt of global warming is that the region suffers high levels of pollution. The long-lived greenhouse gases responsible for global warming are well mixed around the world; other types of pollution are more local and regional. And much localised pollution has the effect of cooling the surface rather than warming it. Sulphate particles, soot and other “aerosols” intercept sunlight before it reaches the surface, either reflecting it back out to space or absorbing it. Aerosols can also change cloud cover, further shielding the ground below from the sun. The Indo-Gangetic plain is among the world’s most polluted areas. Heavy industry, traffic emissions, agricultural-waste burning and the use of solid fuels for cooking all add to high aerosol levels. Several studies suggest that higher levels of these pollutants over the past two decades may have somewhat counteracted the effect of rising temperatures in the region. But that sooty particles absorb sunlight rather than reflect it, cooling the surface but warming the atmosphere, complicates matters. The expansion of irrigation is another explanation for South Asia’s slower-than-elsewhere warming. Water absorbs heat as it evaporates, cooling the air around it. In India the area of irrigated land has doubled since 1980. One study, published in Nature Communications in 2020, estimated that, without irrigation, South Asia could have between two and eight times more days of extreme heat than it does now.There is no scientific consensus on how much these factors have slowed warming in South Asia. But experts agree on what lies ahead. At a recent meeting of Indian and American scientists in Delhi, David Battisti, an atmospheric scientist at the University of Washington in Seattle, said that over the next 20 years India “is pretty much assured” to warm at twice the rate of the past two decades. Daniel Schrag, a professor of geology at Harvard, says temperatures in India will rise faster than in the rest of the world.In the coming decades neither pollution nor irrigation will continue to grow as both have over the past 40 years. They conceal additional warming only as long as their levels are increasing. And they will probably decrease. As Dr Schrag puts it: “India can’t continue to irrigate.” (Groundwater levels in the region are becoming depleted.) “And they also can’t continue to have the level of air pollution they have.”Tackling pollution has been a flagship programme for the Indian government. By 2024 it aimed to reduce aerosol concentrations by 20-30% relative to 2017 levels; this was then extended to 40% by 2026. Many cities missed the 2024 target, although a study published earlier this year found that there has been some improvement in pollution levels over the past decade.Air pollution is a far greater blight to South Asia than extreme heat is. According to the Global Burden of Disease study from the Institute of Health Metrics and Evaluation, at the University of Washington, in 2021 alone aerosol pollution killed 2m-3m people in the region, while extreme heat led to 0.1m-0.6m deaths. “It’s crazy, the numbers for air-pollution-related mortality,” says Bhargav Krishna of the Sustainable Futures Collaborative, a research institute in Delhi. “It’s simply because of the scale of exposure and the year-round exposure that people are having to deal with.” Until recently, pollution has not been an election-winning issue in India, so politicians have been under little pressure to make changes. But in the Delhi Legislative Assembly election campaign earlier this year all three major parties promised to clean up the air. Even a modest temperature rise could be devastating. Already, on some days, the combined effect of heat and humidity pushes parts of the region close to the limits of human habitability—roughly equivalent to temperatures of 45°C with relative humidity of 50%, or 39°C with humidity of 75%. According to Dr Battisti, by 2047 the number of days when the average Indian will experience heat stress could rise four-fold—assuming pollution and irrigation levels stay stable; the number will grow if they drop.Sweltering heat is unavoidable for many South Asians. According to an analysis by the Hindustan Times in 2022, around half of Indians work outdoors and only 10% of households have air-conditioning. Many Indian cities have adopted heatwave action plans, laying out how they will provide cooling and water to people in the event of extreme heat. But few are taking steps to make cities more resilient or mitigate their exposure to heat. Without drastic changes the coming temperature surge will be deadly. ■