Asia - Narendra Modi has kept his vow to make India like Gujarat

Better infrastructure and higher incomes, but also greater segregation and discrimination. THE TWO most consequential South Asians of the 20th century were Gujarati: Mohandas Gandhi and Muhammad Ali Jinnah, respectively the “father of the nation” of India and of Pakistan. So was Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, who as India’s first home minister cajoled (or bullied) 565 “princely states” into joining the union.The four most powerful men in India today are Gujarati. At the top of politics sit Narendra Modi, the prime minister, and his right-hand man, Amit Shah, the home minister and chief strategist of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). The titans of Indian industry are Mukesh Ambani and Gautam Adani, whose conglomerates run everything from ports to telecoms. When Mr Modi became prime minister in 2014, he flew to Delhi in Mr Adani’s private jet.Yet for all their influence in making the country, Gujaratis were laggards when it came to shaping its culture. Until Mr Modi’s reign, India’s idea of itself was built by an Anglophone elite and a Bengali-heavy intellectual class. Gujaratis, in keeping with the stereotype attached to them, focused on business. They play a big role in the financial markets of Mumbai, own conglomerates in east Africa and run diamond-trading houses in Europe and America. Britain is a nation of Gujarati shopkeepers.If an Indian thinks about Gujaratis beyond their role in business, it is for their vegetarianism or the state’s prohibition of alcohol. Some recall the pogrom of 2002 in the state, in which about 1,000 people, mostly Muslims, were killed. Older ones will point out that Gujarat has a history of communal violence dating back to the late 19th century. Yet there is more to Gujarat than business, delicious food and rioting. With some 70m people crammed onto a rugged landscape on India’s west coast, Gujarat is as dazzling in its diversity as India taken whole. This diversity is what Salil Tripathi, a writer based in New York, sets out to explore in his new book, “The Gujaratis”.Books about a particular community are usually of interest only to the community in question. But Gujaratis have outsize importance in today’s India. Mr Modi campaigned in 2014 on a promise to turn all of India into Gujarat. As its chief minister for almost 13 years, he made it synonymous with efficient governance, ease of doing business, high economic growth and first-class infrastructure. As for that unfortunate affair with the pogrom? Many voters were willing to move on. For others it was part of the appeal. At a convention in Ahmedabad last month Rahul Gandhi, the leader of the opposition, told members of his Congress party that to regain power, “the path goes through Gujarat.”Who, then, are the Gujaratis? Mr Tripathi takes an expansive view: anyone who speaks the language, lives in Gujarat, or comes from the state. That includes not just Hindus but Jains, Parsis, Dalits, tribal groups and several types of Muslims: “Gujarati is a language. It is not a diet, nor a religion, and it is certainly not a caste.” The language itself is rich in loan words from Hindi, Urdu, English, Persian and Arabic, a reflection of Gujarat’s ancient trade links. Gujarat’s cosmopolitanism was both a cause and an effect of its mercantile instincts. The state’s harsh climate encouraged rulers to promote trade, attracting entrepreneurs of all persuasions. Doing business, in turn, required pragmatism and accommodation. Even the state’s famed vegetarianism and teetotalism are a bit of a myth. A government survey in 2021 found that 40% of Gujaratis consume meat, almost certainly an understatement since many may not admit it. Bootlegging of alcohol is both rife and tolerated. Business is business.Yet Gujarat has lost its cosmopolitan vibrancy in recent decades, laments Mr Tripathi. Ahmedabad is India’s most religiously segregated city. Vegetarians enforce their diet on entire neighbourhoods, even chasing away delivery riders. Despite making up a tenth of the population, no Muslim has been elected to Parliament since 1989. The BJP has held power uninterrupted since 1998.Mr Modi has now led India for nearly as long as he did Gujarat. He has raised incomes and overhauled infrastructure, even if India remains a hard place to do business and reforms to governance have been neglected. But where India today most closely resembles Gujarat is in its growing communal segregation, increasing religious tensions, the mounting assertiveness of vegetarians, and attacks on its cosmopolitan instincts. In that sense, at least, Mr Modi has more than fulfilled his promise. ■Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.