The Americas - Venezuela’s sound of silence

The people abstain from voting in parliamentary elections as the United States turns oil sanctions back on. Venezuelans are calling it the “ghost election”. On May 25th the regime of President Nicolás Maduro staged a vote to elect governors, mayors and National Assembly representatives. Turnout appeared pitiful. Polling stations were deserted. “Nothing will change with this farce,” says an octogenarian voter in the working-class district of Petare in the capital, Caracas, who cast a ballot only “out of habit”.The government triumphantly claimed a turnout of 43%. Meganálisis, a pollster, puts the real figure at 14%. Most Venezuelans have little desire to vote after what happened in last July’s presidential contest. The opposition candidate, Edmundo González, backed by a popular former congresswoman, María Corina Machado, won in a landslide, getting 67% of the vote. But that result, confirmed by official voting-machine printouts, was not declared. The national electoral authority, an arm of the regime, concocted a victory for Mr Maduro. Hundreds of government critics have since been imprisoned. Mr González is in exile, Ms Machado in hiding. This time she called for Venezuelans to abstain.Her supporters see the low turnout as a victory. But the electoral map is now the solid red of a one-party state, without the regime even needing to cheat. The opposition is down to its last governorship; the ruling United Socialist Party of Venezuela (PSUV) has 23. That tally includes, absurdly, the “state” of Guayana Esequiba, an area bigger than Greece which makes up two-thirds of neighbouring Guyana and has long been claimed by Venezuela. The regime decreed it be added to official election maps in 2023. No votes were cast within the territory. Instead its “governor” was chosen by a few voters in Venezuela’s Bolívar state, across the border.When the new legislative term starts, on January 25th next year, the PSUV will control 253 of the 285 seats. The 29 others will be filled by a mixed opposition, phoney and genuine. The latter includes Henrique Capriles, an ex-governor and two-time former presidential candidate, who broke with Ms Machado before the latest election and told voters to turn out, saying that voting is a rare opportunity for resistance against the regime.Despite already being the beneficiary of a version of democracy whereby his victory seems guaranteed, Mr Maduro hopes to make it even more certain. As he cast his vote he said he intended to change the constitution so that Venezuela would move towards a “communal” electoral system. He has not divulged details, but it could mark the end of the country’s current, albeit abused, model of the representative vote. Elected offices, including the presidency, might instead be chosen by “communes”, whose loyalty is pre-vetted.Still, economic headwinds are gathering. On May 27th the exemptions from sanctions that the United States had granted to Western oil companies in Venezuela, including Chevron, an American giant, expired. The regime will have to resume selling its oil on the black market at a discount, as it did between 2019 and 2023.Chevron alone exported around 240,000 barrels per day of crude from its Venezuelan operations, about a quarter of the country’s total oil output. Now its joint-venture partner, the lumbering state oil company PDVSA, will have to take over 100% of the operation. Logistical complications such as the import of diluents will probably slow production. Francisco Monaldi at Rice University in Houston forecasts “an overall drop of 80,000-150,000 b/d in the next 12 months”. The accompanying financial hit, he predicts, will be about $5bn a year, around 30% of the petrostate’s current oil revenue. The ensuing shortage of dollars will probably increase inflation and push the economy, which has recently stabilised, back into recession.Donald Trump’s government lacks consensus on the best way to deal with Venezuela. The secretary of state, Marco Rubio, has consistently supported a “maximum pressure” strategy. Mr Trump’s envoy for special missions, Richard Grenell, had talked of “building trust” with the regime in exchange for the release of American prisoners if Venezuela accepts migrants deported from the United States.For now, Mr Rubio’s view prevails. His State Department has confirmed that all oil licences “which benefited the regime of Nicolás Maduro” will expire. It also repeated its warning that all Americans in Venezuela “should leave the country immediately”. Mr Trump’s decision to adopt a hard line was apparently finally swayed by congressional Republicans from Florida who warned that they would not support his spending-bill vote on May 22nd if Chevron’s licence was renewed.From her hiding place Ms Machado sends messages to cheer her supporters. One fillip for her movement, revealed on May 5th, was the apparent escape of five senior members of her electoral-campaign team from the residence of the Argentine ambassador in Caracas. They had been holed up there, with state security forces patrolling outside, since March 2024. Mr Rubio said they had got out thanks to a “precise operation”. Venezuela’s government insists it was through “negotiation”.Ms Machado says the regime is weak. In a message released on May 26th to the people of Venezuela, she congratulated the millions who had followed her advice not to vote. “You have the power,” she said. The majority made its voice heard in Venezuela’s last two elections: first by voting, then by abstaining. It plainly wants to see the end of Mr Maduro’s rule. But how? ■Sign up to El Boletín, our subscriber-only newsletter on Latin America, to understand the forces shaping a fascinating and complex region.