China - China’s crazy reverse-credit cards

In the People’s Republic you “pay now, buy later”. To help its economy weather the trade war, China wants its consumers to splash out. The government has plans to subsidise consumer loans, and banks have been permitted to raise borrowing limits for creditworthy customers. But the question of who lends to whom on China’s high street is not straightforward. In the West, retailers extend credit to their customers. In China it is often the other way round.It works like this. When you get a haircut or eat at a restaurant, the seller encourages you to pay in advance for multiple transactions. You might pay upfront for ten haircuts, or put 1,000 yuan ($140) on a pre-paid card, and the business will, in return, give you extra credit to spend. Western credit culture encourages consumers to “buy now, pay later”. In China, it is “pay now, buy later”.Such schemes are not unique to China, but they are unusually common. A report last year calculated that over 1.5bn pre-paid cards were issued in 2023, worth almost 740bn yuan. The firms lock in future sales and obtain money up front for their business (for a typical issuer, the cards account for over 10% of their revenue). In a reversal of normal vendor financing, the customer is, in effect, lending to the enterprise.The bonus the firm adds to the customer’s deposit rises with the size of the initial outlay, and can be large. Customers putting down 10,000 yuan can receive an extra 2,000 yuan to spend in the store. If they use the money within a year, that amounts to an annual “interest” rate of 20%, paid in kind.Loyalty schemes are popular in most countries. Customers might get their tenth coffee or loaf of bread free after paying as they go for the first nine. The pre-payment model is familiar to patrons of gyms and yoga studios. But those payments are usually for a fixed schedule of sessions, not a fixed number of them. China’s pre-paid cards are similar to gift cards. But such cards often go unredeemed. In China, most pre-paid cards do not expire.The risk is that the business itself might expire, and you lose any unspent portion of your stake. That now seems to be happening a lot. A survey in 2021 by China Youth Daily, a newspaper, found that over 80% of respondents had bought into pre-paid schemes, and over 45% of them had been burned when merchants folded. Many bankruptcies are genuine, but now some scammers are setting up pre-paid schemes, too.Anything that causes public anger will always draw attention from the Communist Party. In March the supreme court announced new guidance on the regulation of pre-paid deals. From May 1st the court’s interpretation of existing law means that firms may not dodge their obligations by changing their name or ownership structure. Commercial landlords are also now responsible for vetting the reliability of their tenants. The owner of a shopping mall can be liable for a tenant that leaves its customers in the lurch. A commentary in Legal Daily, a prominent official newspaper, noted that the new protections around pre-paid schemes will “let the people dare to consume…thereby injecting lasting impetus into economic growth”.Some merchants are making their offers even more attractive. On May 1st a reflexology spa in Beijing pitched a new plan. A deposit of 10,000 yuan will earn a bonus of 7,200 yuan to be spent on stress-relieving treatments. It is a long-established, upstanding place. Your stressed-out correspondent almost dared to consume. ■Subscribers can sign up to Drum Tower, our new weekly newsletter, to understand what the world makes of China—and what China makes of the world.