Asia - Myanmar’s scam empire gets worse, not better

Fewer Chinese are forced to come, but more workers are coming by choice. For Samuel, a sports teacher in Sierra Leone, a Facebook message promising a similar job in Thailand at ten times his salary was irresistible. Yet his dream curdled when he landed in Bangkok. Spirited across the border into Myanmar, he was tortured and coerced into the online-scam industry, and confined for ten months in a vast compound secured by barbed wire, high walls and armed guards. His job was to pose as an affluent Singaporean woman to defraud victims on eBay. Deliverance, of a sort, arrived in February. He was one of some 7,000 people released from scam compounds in Myawaddy, a town on Myanmar’s border with Thailand that is among the world’s largest online-fraud hubs. According to some estimates, this industry dwarfs the global illicit-drug trade in value. The raid was a mere dent; the United Nations reckons that at least 120,000 people remain captive in such facilities in Myanmar. Globally, this illegal business may have as many as 1.5m coerced and voluntary workers, according to the United States Institute of Peace, a think-tank in Washington.After more than two grim months in a camp in Myanmar, on May 8th Samuel was able to fly to Freetown, Sierra Leone’s capital. Around 400 people, mostly from Ethiopia, remain stranded in Myawaddy. Repatriation gets tied up in red tape involving embassies in Thailand or Myanmar, when for many Africans the nearest diplomatic mission might be in Beijing or Tokyo. And many African governments are unable or unwilling to pay for a flight home. Those left behind are held in military camps or repurposed scam compounds, mostly run by the Kayin Border Guard Force, a powerful militia. Access to food and water is limited. Several people are reported to have died since February for want of medical care.Scam operations continue to grow. Judah Tana of Global Advance Projects, an NGO on the Thai-Myanmar border, says people from around the world, including India and the Philippines, are “flocking” to the fraud compound. Many now arrive voluntarily, aware that their role will involve conning others online. Previously, most scammers’ journeys to Myanmar involved a flight to Bangkok airport, a seven-hour car ride to Mae Sot, a Thai town on the Myanmar border, and being smuggled across. Thailand has made this journey harder. Mr Tana says people have to take a circuitous route from Bangkok to Mae Sot, swapping cars around ten times.He says fewer Chinese nationals are appearing at the border. This is perhaps unsurprising—China’s government was behind the release of Samuel and the others from scam compounds in February. In January the trafficking of Wang Xing, a Chinese actor, into a Myanmar scam compound ignited outrage in China, prompting the government to press the Thai and Myanmar authorities to act. This pressure, applied to local militias, prompted them to shed what Jacob Sims, an expert on transnational organised crime in South-East Asia, terms the “low-performing, bottom 5-10% of their workforce”. Samuel and his fellow detainees owe their freedom less to a crackdown than to a calculated pruning of the workforce. Dismantling this vast, criminal enterprise will require a much broader, sustained effort. ■