Middle East & Africa - Israel fuels three emergencies as its furious allies bail out

Binyamin Netanyahu has a lethal addiction to crises. YOU MIGHT think it would be impossible for the inferno in Israel and Gaza to burn hotter. Yet Binyamin Netanyahu is fuelling three simultaneous emergencies: a humanitarian one in Gaza; a torching of support among European allies; and a constitutional crisis over who controls the security services, army and courts. The pressure on Israel and its institutions is almost unbearable for the country. A culminating moment is probably imminent. Whether that comes in the form of a reinvasion of Gaza that finally ruptures Israel’s alliances and fractures its armed forces and society, or through a U-turn or ceasefire that triggers the prime minister’s political demise, remains dangerously unclear.Look first at Gaza, where the Israel Defence Forces (IDF) are poised to launch the main phase of a devastating new campaign. The IDF controls around a third of the strip (see map). Its strikes are killing dozens of Palestinians daily. Under its plan the IDF would retake 75% of it, pushing 2m people into zones with 25% of the land. The government says that its goal is to eradicate Hamas once and for all. But as they prepare for attack, some officers quietly concede they do not have enough soldiers for such an endeavour. They know, too, that Hamas will be able to recruit more teenagers and hand out more Kalashnikov rifles almost indefinitely.The probable outcome is a further humanitarian catastrophe. To counter that charge, Israel’s government claims it can get aid to Gazans without giving Hamas tacit control of it. On May 26th Israel launched a distribution network, using “hubs” to hand out weekly rations. The next day thousands of hungry people overran the area and work was suspended. Aid groups say the plan is woefully insufficient. The eu’s top diplomat says the union does not back the venture and that aid must not be weaponised. Jake Wood, the head of the Gaza Humanitarian Foundation which runs the network, has just resigned, saying it was impossible to carry out the plan while adhering to the principles of “humanity, neutrality, impartiality, and independence”. If the proposal succeeds, which looks extremely unlikely, Israel plans to use the hubs to corral Gazans around them, while destroying what little is left of the strip.The strikes and the apparent futility of any reinvasion are rupturing Israel’s backing in Europe, which has broadly supported the war against Hamas following the atrocities of October 7th 2023. Britain has suspended talks on a new trade deal and 17 members of the EU, Israel’s largest trade partner, want to re-examine their association agreement. On May 27th Ursula von der Leyen, the European Commission president, called the civilian deaths “abhorrent”. On the same day Friedrich Merz, the German chancellor and a staunch supporter of Israel, said that “the current level of attacks on Gaza can no longer be justified.” Germany may limit military exports or restrict their use: it sold a third of the arms Israel imported during 2020-24. That would mark a huge shift for Israel’s indispensable European ally.Even the White House is queasy. On May 25th Donald Trump said he would like “to stop that whole situation as quickly as possible”. He is keen to strike a deal between America and Iran; Israel is more interested in attacking Iran’s nuclear sites. Meanwhile, Mr Trump’s personal envoy, Steve Witkoff, is also trying to broker a new ceasefire in Gaza between Israel and Hamas. So far, Mr Netanyahu has refused to accept it, but some Israeli officials are increasingly confident that he will cave.As Gaza starves and Israel’s allies desert him, Mr Netanyahu is stoking a third crisis: a constitutional crunch with the security services, army and courts. He says he will appoint a messianic general as chief of the Shin Bet, the domestic-security service. Mr Netanyahu has tried to blame the agency, as well as the IDF, for being caught unawares by Hamas. Ronen Bar, the outgoing Shin Bet boss, has accused Mr Netanyahu of dodging his own responsibility for coddling Hamas before the war, trying to get the service to do his political dirty work and firing him to cover up allegations of corruption within the prime minister’s office. After a battle in the supreme court, which ruled in his favour, Mr Bar will step down from his position of his own accord on June 15th.His replacement is Major General David Zini, an infantry commander with no background in intelligence or domestic security. But the appointment will thrill the prime minister’s hard-right base. Even his IDF comrades see him, a scion of a nationalist-rabbinical family, as messianic. Recently he warned of “the intention of bad Muslims to kill good Jews ever since Ishmael was born and until further notice”. (Some Jewish traditions name Ishmael, the eldest son of the biblical patriarch, Abraham, as forefather of the Arabs.) In a meeting of the idf general command, he is reported to have opposed any prisoner exchange with Hamas since “this is an eternal war”. As Shin Bet chief he would have a role in authorising which Palestinians Israel would release in any potential deal. His position on the war runs counter to most Israelis, who want an end to the conflict with a ceasefire and the release of the remaining 20-odd living hostages.The attorney-general, Gali Baharav-Miara, had told the prime minister that before replacing Mr Bar he must wait for legal guidelines, but Mr Netanyahu has ploughed ahead. The Shin Bet is tasked with protecting Israel’s leaders. Mr Netanyahu is on trial for charges of bribery and fraud (which he denies), and is set to be cross-examined for the first time in a few weeks. He has in the past tried to get the Shin Bet to limit his court appearances for “security reasons”. A new chief may be amenable to such requests.The Shin Bet’s mandate also includes protecting Israel’s democratic institutions. Mr Bar accused the prime minister of telling him to use the service to monitor anti-government protesters. He says he refused to obey that order. He has also said he believes he was fired for investigating the allegations against Mr Netanyahu’s staff.The episode is sowing discord between Israel’s security chiefs. The prime minister did not inform the IDF chief of staff, Lieutenant General Eyal Zamir, of the appointment of General Zini, a serving officer. On May 25th General Zamir put out a pointed statement that “this is not an endless war”. He has clashed with the government, arguing that the survival of the hostages and the supply of food should take priority over clobbering Hamas. Even if legal obstacles force Mr Netanyahu to back down over the Shin Bet, he is eager to have this fight in order to distract Israelis, exhausted by the war, and to rally his base with another showdown between his hardline government and the legal establishment.The prime minister knows his unpopular expansion of the war in Gaza is likely to fail to achieve its objectives and prompt a schism with Europe and probably America, too. He knows, too, that the alternative, a ceasefire, is likely to end his partnership with the far right, which demands the perpetual occupation of Gaza, and to trigger elections. With no way out, Mr Netanyahu’s solution is familiar and devastating: to ignite ever more crises. ■Sign up to the Middle East Dispatch, a weekly newsletter that keeps you in the loop on a fascinating, complex and consequential part of the world.