Asia - Australia’s conservatives bicker in the political wilderness

The Liberal-National coalition will be resurrected, but its prospects look grim. THE COALITION, a partnership of the right-wing Liberal and National parties, is so established in Australia that it has acquired a capital “C” and has ruled the country for around two-thirds of the past century. Earlier this year opinion polls suggested it would win the election held on May 3rd quite comfortably. Instead, the incumbent social-democratic Labor Party won by a landslide; the Liberals lost most of their seats in Australian cities; and the Coalition broke up on May 21st. They reunited a week later. But the conservatives’ path back to power looks long and narrow.At the polls, the Coalition’s flirtation with Trumpism proved disastrous. Voters saw Peter Dutton, who led the Liberals into the election, as negative and out of touch with modern, multicultural Australia. He even lost his own seat. His successor as party leader is Sussan Ley, the first woman in that role, who has to take on the task of rebuilding a shell-shocked political movement. Members of the Liberals’ moderate faction argue that, to attract women, young people, aspirational immigrants and business-owners, it should re-embrace the core principles of liberalism. Charlotte Mortlock, who leads an initiative to boost the representation of women in Liberal ranks, notes that while the “average” Australian is a 37-year-old woman, she estimates the average Liberal member is a man in his 70s. Many argue part of the solution is a gender quota, which the party old guard has long resisted.Ms Ley will have to ignore calls from the party’s right wing and media outlets owned by Rupert Murdoch to intensify culture wars over immigration and climate change. During the election campaign Ted O’Brien, the Liberals’ new deputy leader, floated the idea that Australia could consider following Donald Trump and America in quitting the Paris climate-change agreement. Some National MPs would go further, and ditch altogether the Coalition’s agreed goal of reaching net-zero emissions by 2050.The break-up of the coalition has exposed the two parties’ fundamental ideological differences. Whereas the Liberals are more consistently pro-market, the Nationals want government to invest in phone and internet reception for their rural constituents. One of the policies over which the Coalition split was the Nationals wanting government power to break up Australia’s big supermarkets (the Coles and Woolworths chains together have around 65% market share), a level of intervention that troubles Liberals.That David Littleproud, the Nationals’ leader, insisted that a Coalition agreement be urgently negotiated, even as Ms Ley was nursing her mother on her deathbed, further dented the conservatives’ image. Yet the Liberals swallowed their discomfort and agreed to back powers to force retailers seen to be abusing market power to divest. They also agreed not to drop a call for lifting a national moratorium on nuclear power, though a proposal to build seven nuclear power plants across Australia was partly blamed for the Liberals’ catastrophic electoral performance.The infighting adds to a sense that the Coalition is chaotic and divided. Malcolm Turnbull, a former Liberal prime minister, said the Nationals were “holding a gun to the Liberal Party’s head”. He said this was “stupid politically”, because it would feed a perception that the tail was wagging the dog. (The Liberals hold 28 lower-house seats to the Nationals’ 15.)Australians, who have lost several prime ministers to backroom party tussles over the past 15 years, value stability in politics. Having lost so many seats this year, the Coalition may face years out of government. Healthy democracy requires a competent opposition. It is not just conservatives who have an interest in the Coalition’s getting its house in order. ■