Middle East & Africa - Afrobeats’ new groove

Africa’s growing diaspora is transforming the continent’s musical exports. IN 2023 ODUMODUBLVCK, a Nigerian rapper and singer, put out his first single. Called “Declan Rice” after an English footballer, the track saw a fresh surge in streams in April when Mr Rice scored two free kicks for Arsenal in a tense match against Real Madrid. On the record the artist, brought up in Abuja as Tochukwu Ojugwu, layers Pidgin English on a drill track to liken Mr Rice’s game-changing star power to his own. Since its release he has signed with Native Records, a Nigerian label based in Britain, and has put out a mixtape featuring an Italian rapper that has proved popular from Britain to Qatar.Living and working across the world, Odumodublvck typifies a new generation of African musicians who in recent years have won global awards, topped international charts and rocked stages from India to Brazil. Spotify, a streaming platform, found that streams of what is referred to as Afrobeats increased more than six-fold between 2017 and 2022, and by 33% in 2024 alone. As African music has spread around the world, it has also acquired more varied influences and a more diverse sound, partly thanks to its changing audience. Afrobeats now refers to a range of styles that is hard to capture in a single word, changing the business.The popularity of African music is not new. African acts from King Sunny Ade, a Nigerian juju singer, to Amadou & Mariam, a Malian blues duo, have played on festival stages in America and Britain since the 1970s. But as diasporas have grown, some African artists now perform abroad more often than at home. Yoruba slang and Zulu call-and-response loops echo from London’s O2 arena to New York’s Madison Square Garden. This summer Rema, one of the world’s most streamed African artists, will headline Japan’s first-ever Afrobeats festival, performing alongside Ghanaian, South African and Jamaican acts.As audiences have expanded, the music has changed. Songs are a fraction of the length of Fela Kuti’s 15-minute ensembles from the 1980s, made more digestible for a generation of TikTok dancers who often discover new sounds on social media. The tracks are sped up to sound more poppy or slowed down to marry better with R&B. Lyrical rap and underground music lean heavily on American hip-hop. Cross-genre collaborations, samples and interpolations have become the norm.Rema featured Selena Gomez, an American pop singer, on a remix for his 2023 hit “Calm Down”. It became the first song led by an African artist to exceed 1bn streams on Spotify. Within the continent, artists in Nigeria have lifted from, and collaborated with, Amapiano hitmakers in South Africa, who slow down European drum-and-bass beats and fuse them with log drums and local languages. “Pop borrows from other genres. Afropop is nothing different,” says Seni Saraki, who runs Native Records (and prefers the moniker Afropop to Afrobeats).A more global sound has brought a more global ownership. Spotify paid 58bn naira ($36.5m) to rights-holders of Nigerian music in 2024. Because many artists and their labels have links with global firms, little of that stayed in Nigeria. And while global reach has brought commercial success for some, it has also meant less creative control. “We need the money and we need the connections, so it’s a bit of a sacrifice,” says Joey Akan, a podcaster.Artists earn more from streams in richer countries than in poorer ones. Spotify says this is because royalties are proportional to subscription prices which, based on the currencies’ purchasing powers, vary widely across countries. A premium subscription costs around $2 a month in Ghana, but $17 in Switzerland. The financial benefits of producing music that does well in the West can sway artistic choices made in the studios, sometimes to the detriment of an artist’s identity. “The songs were not picked by me, I wasn’t in the right place,” Davido, a Nigerian-American singer, later recalled of a collaboration with Sony.The diversification of African music reflects its success in shaping global pop culture. Yet for now, African countries are benefiting less than they could. By investing in concert infrastructure, improving protection of intellectual property and developing the skills of young musicians, they could help ensure that Africa’s musical appeal is as good for the continent as it is for the rest of the world. ■Sign up to the Analysing Africa, a weekly newsletter that keeps you in the loop about the world’s youngest—and least understood—continent.