Britain - Where next for Britain’s broken National Health Service?

To save itself, the party that founded Britain’s health service must rescue it. Months after Labour won a landslide election in 1945, the party’s new health secretary predicted that its National Health Service (NHS) would be the “envy” of the world. Initially, Aneurin Bevan was right. Foreigners were in awe of the idea that a state could provide universal health care free at the point of use. Brazil, Italy and Malta all copied the system. At home, it became a national religion from the moment people first queued for free prescription glasses and false teeth.Today it is a national embarrassment. Hospital waiting lists in England, at 7.4m, are almost double what they were in 2007 (see chart 1). In emergency departments, 12-hour waits have become routine. Seasonal flu outbreaks frequently trigger hospital “critical incidents”. Some staff are “desensitised” to poor care, the NHS’s chief executive, Sir Jim Mackey, recently admitted. Failures are so common that in 2023-24 the health department set aside £58bn ($77bn), almost a third of its annual budget, to cover the potential cost of past clinical negligence.Public satisfaction with the NHS, which peaked at 70% in 2010, slumped to just 21% in 2024—a striking collapse of faith in an institution once more cherished than the monarchy. “I don’t mind being poorly abroad,” says Sandra Cragie, who suffers from a painful inflammatory condition. “I dread being poorly here.” The country’s health is similarly dire. Among 17 rich countries, only Americans die more from preventable causes. Britons have the lowest life expectancy in western Europe. The day after another Labour landslide last July, Wes Streeting, Bevan’s modern-day successor, declared the service “broken”.Turning things around is a moral imperative for Sir Keir Starmer’s government; to many the NHS is Labour’s greatest achievement. An upcoming ten-year plan for health, expected in June, is also an opportunity for a government struggling in the polls. After the cost of living, no issue matters more to Brits, according to the Office for National Statistics. And while immigration and economic issues divide voters, the NHS unites them. Fixing it is Labour’s best chance of rebuilding trust in the state.It won’t be easy. Britain already spends 11% of GDP on health—less than France and Germany; more than Italy and Spain. Yet it is only just beginning to feel the demographic pressures common in other rich countries. In his first week on the job, Mr Streeting was shown a sobering chart—a steeply rising curve of demand. On the current trajectory, he told Parliament, in 50 years’ time 100% of the public would work for the NHS. Rebuilding it for the 21st century, he argues, requires the “same revolutionary approach” as Bevan’s.Mr Streeting appears up for the challenge. He brings personal experience as both a patient (a cancer survivor) and a policymaker. He is young (42), charismatic and—as his Bevan analogy suggests—fiercely ambitious. He immediately asked Ara Darzi, a Labour peer and surgeon, to provide a diagnosis. The ten-year plan is to be the prescription.The patient is in a dismal state, Lord Darzi swiftly reported back. He traced the source of the malaise back to the 2010s, when Conservative governments oversaw a de facto spending freeze of the service (after adjusting for inflation and demographic change). This restricted the number of available nurses, hospital beds and scanners. Worsening broader socioeconomic factors such as poor housing and low incomes, all of which deteriorated during the austerity years, meant Britain meanwhile grew poorer, fatter and sicker.To make matters worse, money is spent in the wrong places. The share of the NHS budget going to hospitals increased from 47% to 58% between 2006 and 2022, squeezing funding elsewhere. Britain has far fewer community nurses and 16% fewer GPs per person than its rich-world peers (one reason Ms Cragie, despite calling her GP “hundreds of times”, can never get through). People turn up at hospital instead: Britons visit emergency departments at twice the rate of the Dutch.During the pandemic the NHS became a covid-only service, with other services all but shut down (see chart 2). Recovery has been slow. Productivity remains below pre-pandemic levels, not least because cuts to capital budgets have left buildings crumbling. Staff morale is abysmal.What, then, of the prescription? The ten-year plan will propose three big shifts. It will promise to deliver more care outside hospitals—the most expensive part of the system—and closer to people’s homes. Paper records, pagers and slow computers will be replaced by new technology. And investment will shift to prevention; adding a healthy year of life through public-health measures costs around a quarter as much as doing so through clinical treatment.The promises are sensible, if hardly new. Variations have appeared in most of the eight long-term NHS plans drawn up over the past 25 years. What would be radical is if they were implemented. There are some signs this could happen. The plan is expected to include financial incentives to shift funding from hospitals into community services. And anticipated steps towards shared digital records are a hopeful sign that this government may be willing to do the unsexy, but necessary, stuff needed to enable a tech revolution.Three familiar risks could yet scupper it. The first is short-termism. Labour’s main manifesto pledge on health—that by 2029 patients should expect to wait no more than 18 weeks for planned hospital treatment—is understandable in the face of public pressure. “It’s the thing the prime minister holds my feet to the fire on the most,” Mr Streeting admits. The temptation will be to reach for quick fixes. There are signs that this is already happening, such as the nationwide policy in England to pay hospitals for removing “pointless appointments” from waiting lists, which could help identify people who no longer need treatment but can also encourage bumping those who (still) do.Heavy reliance on outsourcing, another quick fix scaled up by Labour, could also backfire. A government memo leaked to the Sunday Times concluded that a scheme to outsource cataract operations to private providers had drained the NHS of doctors and money (by removing simple, high-volume procedures that help subsidise more complex eye care). The private cataract market has grown by 400% since 2019.A second risk is that power may be wielded poorly. In March the government said it would abolish NHS England, the micromanaging quango responsible for the day-to-day running of the health service. Instead Mr Streeting wants to copy a former Labour health secretary, Alan Milburn, by giving greater autonomy to local services, using a smaller centre to set strategy and standards, and reintroducing hospital league tables. But he will have to learn the lessons from the 2000s; when Stafford Hospital prioritised rankings over care, it led to hundreds of patients suffering neglect and unnecessary deaths.The third challenge is reform without new money. Little is expected from the forthcoming spending review (an eventual 4% boost to annual spending in real terms, doled out in the budget last October, has gone mostly on pay). Yet moving from analogue to digital in England alone is expected to cost £15bn over five years, estimates the Health Foundation. Reforms to social care—crucial for keeping patients out of hospital—have been delayed until 2036, in large part because they are deemed unaffordable. With many NHS trusts’ finances in dire shape, attempts to force through savings can look counterproductive. Hospital trusts with the longest maintenance backlogs are being penalised by government with cuts to their capital budgets. It all feels rather “penny wise, pound foolish”, says one frustrated government adviser.Much about the NHS remains wonderful. It has an excellent science base and is a world leader in genomics. It has lower administrative overheads than other systems and its centralisation could make it a dream for the big-data collection needed to fulfil the potential of AI. But to fully leverage these strengths, Labour must avoid the mistakes of the past. Mr Streeting knows how much is at stake. “If we get this right, it’s the game-changing moment for the NHS in the 21st century—and how we deliver health care,” he says. “The alternative…doesn’t bear thinking about.”■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in Britain, sign up to Blighty, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.