Europe - A new threat to Erdogan: Gen Z

Young people are fed up with President Recep Tayyip Erdogan. Turkish high-schoolers and university students are too young to remember Turkey before Recep Tayyip Erdogan, in power since 2003. But when police came for the Turkish president’s top opponent, Ekrem Imamoglu, on March 19th, hundreds of thousands of them took to the streets. Now many of them are in prison too. Though down from an initial 301, an estimated 30 students and recent graduates are still awaiting trial in various Turkish prisons, with another 12 under house arrest.A heavy police presence and prosecutors in waiting have curtailed big public demonstrations. But city streets and university campuses bubble with a different sit-in, boycott or small-scale protest every day. On May 13th, for instance, six students were arrested for protesting against the visit of a controversial Islamist preacher. Mr Erdogan has always hoped to raise a new generation of pious youth. But Turkey’s Gen Z is not only less religious than the country’s strongman expected. It may also pose the greatest threat to his rule.Those aged 18-29, the current adult portion of Gen Z, make up almost a quarter of the electorate. Opinion polls now say that only 11% or so of them are willing to vote for Mr Erdogan’s AK party. The disaffected among Gen Z tend to blame the government’s grip on Turkey’s institutions for limiting their chances of getting a good education, making ends meet or seeing their votes count. They simply walk away en masse from political rallies, or loudly shush the speakers. “Gen Z finds this kind of speech cringe when so many of us need to budget even to buy cardboard for protest banners,” says a student activist.Gen Z’s presence on the streets and its social-media campaigns also encourage the main opposition People’s Republican Party (CHP) to be bold. Government critics say they “crossed a threshold of fear” after a video showing young protesters forcing their way through police barricades went viral after Mr Imamoglu’s arrest. Hundreds of thousands of people joined the biggest protests Turkey had seen for more than a decade, defying a week-long ban on public gatherings. The scale of those protests probably stopped the government from charging Mr Imamoglu with terrorism and putting in a government stooge to run Istanbul. “Young people provide energy for the CHP to resist government pressure,” says Berk Esen of Sabanci University. The opposition reckons it can mobilise huge crowds when required.But they have not been able to prevent the crackdown from spreading. The most recent wave of arrests saw some 25 people, including CHP municipal officials and businesspeople, rounded up on May 26th for alleged corruption. Around 400 people were detained during May Day protests. X has blocked Mr Imamoglu’s account, which has nearly 10m followers, after a government request. The opposition is ready to turn up the heat. “We will be on the streets,” said the CHP’s leader, Ozgur Ozel, after being slapped in the face on May 4th at the funeral of a pro-Kurdish politician, a move he interpreted as a message to stay indoors. “I dare those who sent that message. Bring it on.” ■To stay on top of the biggest European stories, sign up to Café Europa, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.