Britain - Sir Keir Starmer’s Scottish reset is under strain

The relationship is friendlier, but more rivalrous. Since the independence referendum of 2014, Scotland’s politicians have bombarded its people with constitutional blueprints. The Scottish National Party (SNP), which runs the devolved government in Edinburgh, sought a second vote on separation. The Conservative Party, ruling in Westminster, responded with a doctrine of “muscular unionism”. Thinkers in the Labour Party sought to split the difference with ideas for “devo-max”, or a federal Britain. Politics became paralysed.Sir Keir Starmer, entering Downing Street in July 2024, had a Starmeresque solution. He offered no grand thinking on the constitution; instead, his promise was simply to make the devolution settlement of 1998 run better. Polls suggested Scots of all camps wanted their “two governments” in London and Edinburgh to co-operate on practical problems, such as child poverty. Tempers would cool. Sensibilism would heal the union.In practice this is a partial success. A noisily dysfunctional relationship has become businesslike. Things are getting done. Talk of independence, a nagging headache for any inhabitant of Downing Street, has been pushed down the agenda. But the rivalry is intense, and the harmony may not last.The “reset” began with a cheery meeting between Sir Keir and John Swinney, the Scottish first minister, in Edinburgh days after the general election. Ministers in the Scotland Office (a British government department) talk to Kate Forbes, the deputy first minister, and her colleagues continually. The Scottish government has been uncharacteristically relaxed about Westminster passing laws in areas that encroach on its domain, such as tobacco control. Renewable energy is a bright spot: both governments want lots of it, but regulation is the preserve of Westminster, while planning permission and skills are Edinburgh’s. Officials rave about “extremely dynamic” collaboration.But the relationship has become more fractious as political fundamentals reassert themselves. The SNP and Labour are in direct electoral competition in a way that was never true of the Tories. Both claim the mantle of the natural party of industrial Scotland. The first test will be a by-election to the devolved parliament at Holyrood in the towns of Hamilton, Larkhall and Stonehouse, south-east of Glasgow, on June 5th. It is a foretaste of the long campaign for the elections to Holyrood in May 2026, where Labour will try to oust the SNP from a government it has run since 2007. The SNP’s record is sketchy and its popularity has fallen—yet, since Sir Keir came to power, Labour’s has fallen faster.There is a gulf between the two parties in worldview. The reset was widely misunderstood, some in the British government say today: it did not mean giving the SNP what it wanted for the sake of peace, but working with it out of necessity to deliver public goods. Nor did it mean the end of conflict—only the end to the pursuit of conflict as an electoral strategy of grievance-stoking. Labour has a mandate to make policy in Scotland, they argue, since it won 37 of 57 seats there in the general election. Ministers have cajoled Whitehall to end a culture of “devolve and forget”, and to think more about Scotland when carving up budgets and setting policies.By working with the SNP, the logic runs, Labour can highlight its rival’s shortcomings more effectively than by criticising from a distance. In Hamilton Jackie Baillie, Labour’s deputy leader in Scotland, points to funds set aside by the Labour-run council to rebuild the town centre, which is dominated by the derelict hulk of Bairds, a concrete 1960s-era department store that closed in 2014. “It then invites the Scottish government to do likewise,” she says. “We drag the SNP along in our wake.”For the SNP, the reset is a pretext to rehearse an old nationalist argument: that Scotland will always be sidelined in the union. The reset is cosmetic, the party argues, since it means no greater say for Scotland over areas that are the preserve of Westminster, such as budgets and immigration. It complains that the Scottish government had no oversight of Sir Keir’s negotiations with the EU and America. “It’s the mushroom treatment,” says one party figure: kept in the dark and fed manure.In Labour, this tension is sometimes characterised as one between “nation-builders” and “place-shapers”. Whereas the SNP seeks the powers and rights befitting a proto-state, Labour’s focus is on the towns where Scots actually live.But if not a cure for the union, the reset has at least coincided with a pause in the independence debate. Voters are still split down the middle on the case for separation, but it has all but dropped off the agenda. That is due less to Sir Keir’s strategy than to Mr Swinney’s: he has quietened talk of a referendum as he seeks to rebuild the SNP’s reputation for competent management of public services, which polls suggest most Scots regard as a much higher priority. However, if the SNP triumphs next May, Labour MPs fear, the demands for a new vote will surely return.There is a risk of Sir Keir fighting the last war. The bigger problem for the British government is not Scots’ dissatisfaction with the union, but a disdain for their political class at large. A project premised on the notion that Scots want their “two governments” to co-operate presupposes that they have faith in either. Reform UK, Nigel Farage’s party, which has few roots in Scotland, may do well in Hamilton. If so, says Scott Finlay, a 46-year-old social worker waiting for a train, the established parties will have only themselves to blame. He regards them as distant and deaf. Once a Labour voter, now he is undecided. “I’m pretty angry with my country.” He adds, by way of clarification: “Scotland, and the UK.” ■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in Britain, sign up to Blighty, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.