Britain - Should cheese rolling be protected as British heritage?

The government mulls making England’s daftest sport official. Pressed against a hill in Gloucestershire, in south-west England, on Bank Holiday Monday, the crowd knows exactly what it wants. “Cheese! Cheese! Cheese!” they chant. Soon they get their wish. A seven-pound Double Gloucester is flung downhill. Two dozen men throw themselves after it. They bounce, slide and tumble down a slope as steep as a ski run. The winner gets the cheese, and only a mild concussion.Cheese rolling is, for now, not officially recognised. That may soon change. This summer, the government will invite public submissions for a national inventory of living culture. Cheese rolling, along with other delights such as Morris dancing, pantomime and sea shanties, is likely to feature. Compiling such a list is a requirement from joining a 2003 UN convention on safeguarding “intangible cultural heritage”, which Britain ratified only last year. Once on the national register, traditions can then be listed by UNESCO, the UN’s culture agency.For enthusiasts, this is long overdue. France uses the UNESCO label to show off its perfume-making and “know how” of the baguette. China’s 44 entries include shadow puppetry, medicinal bathing and the Muqam traditions of Uyghurs, an oppressed group. UNESCO lists the intangible heritage of some 150 countries, including Afghanistan, which (jointly with Iran and others) has added four entries since the Taliban’s return in 2021. Embarrassing, then, that Britain—often obsessed with its past—has none.Or not. The origin stories of many national traditions are, after all, exaggerated. Most folk customs do not, despite the claims of Victorian historians, have ancient roots, notes Liz Williams in her book about British folklore, “Rough Music”. There is no evidence that Morris dancing stems from fertility rites, or that cheese rolling is a pagan ritual, or else linked to Phoenician sun worship. The earliest recorded mention of cheese rolling dates to the 1820s.Heritage also evolves. The cheese festival once featured wrestling, gurning and shin-kicking; if some activists have their way, the cheese will one day be vegan. Some customs are revived after decades—maypoles were banned by the Long Parliament in 1644. Others, like bull-baiting, are best left behind. Survival depends less on official lists than on local enthusiasm. “Things survive if communities want them to,” says Mike Robinson, a professor of cultural heritage at Nottingham Trent University.In recent years, priorities have shifted. Ministers began to praise British customs as much as castles. Key was a compromise with the governments of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland that each nation could compile its own separate list. Yet fearing “few winners and many losers”, the government says it has no plans to try for UNESCO listings soon. The fear is unspoken, yet tangible: choosing Notting Hill Carnival over Hogmanay could strain the union.Dr Williams is ambivalent about formal recognition. Classifying traditions can help preserve them, but “you don’t want to sanitise things out of existence,” she warns. Official status for cheese rolling would sit uneasily with occasional local attempts to ban it. The safety concerns are not so much about broken bones (though 15 people were seriously injured in 1993), but overcrowding, which a UNESCO label would worsen. Thousands cram onto the hill from all over the world; BBC drones broadcast the chaos from above. A German is one of this year’s winners. Cheese rolling gets quite enough attention as it is.■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in Britain, sign up to Blighty, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.