Britain - What on earth is what3words?

It sounds odd but it is changing how people find their way. Number 10 Downing Street is “indoor.myself.rather”. The front gate of Buckingham Palace is, unflashily, “rather. cars.bland”. The North Pole is glummer: “asking.mistreated.printmakers”. And the South Pole is the similarly hostile “mercilessly.accusation.nipper”.Welcome to the world of what3words. If you have driven somewhere rural and remote recently you will probably need no explanation of what on earth what3words might be. If you have not: it is a global location tool that uses words rather than numbers to pinpoint places. The way it works is simple. It divides the world into trillions of squares of three-by-three metres, then assigns three words to each square to identify it. The result is somewhere between a mapping app and a poetry one, as if Edward Lear were to have offered you directions: a part of the Louvre, for example, is “hush.touched.silver”.The London-based app follows in a long tradition. Britain is famous, perhaps infamous, for the lines that it has drawn on maps (time zones, partitions). But it has helped to cover maps in less controversial shapes, too. The habit of adding concentric squiggly lines to maps to show mountain elevation began in Britain in 1778, when a mathematician called Charles Hutton invented the contour line. The practice of covering cities in imaginary postal patchworks, meanwhile, began in 1857 when a Victorian reformer divided London into ten districts, naming each after the points of the compass—NE, SW—to make letter delivery intuitively easier.That intuition matters. Conveying location is generally regarded as a geographical problem. In truth it is also a psychological one, since to give someone directions requires two things: the direction and also the someone. The latter is very important since people are fallible and forgetful, says Alan Baddeley, an emeritus professor of psychology at Liverpool University who helped redesign Britain’s postcode system. What matters is not just the mapping capacity of a system but its “memorability”.Chris Sheldrick, the co-founder of what3words, found this to his cost in 2013. At the time, he was running a business providing the music for events such as weddings in venues such as pretty, rural villas. But the problem with pretty, rural villas is that they tend to be quite hard to find. Street numbers work only if there are streets. Postcodes cover vast areas of the countryside. And in much of the world there is no formal address system at all.Mr Sheldrick took to giving directions in latitude and longitude. Then at an event in Italy, a lorry drove to N 42.804509, E 12.683829 rather than N 41.804509, E 12.683829. The difference in numbers was tiny: a single digit. The difference to Mr Sheldrick was vast: his sound system was two hours north, rather than somewhere east of Rome. He realised that any good location system must be “really simple”. What3words is the result. Mr Sheldrick chose to divide the world into those squares, to give the precision that would help find not merely a venue but a particular entrance. A mathematician friend suggested using simple, dictionary words like “table, chair, spoons” to identify each one.If the idea is simple, choosing the 40,000 words needed is not. What3words employs linguists who manually go through each country’s dictionary, removing rude words lest they offend (“bottom” appears in the English version but not “bum”) and homophones lest they confuse (English loses “sun” and “son”). Complicated words are not removed entirely but do tend to be exiled to less populous places (“dodecahedron”, says Mr Sheldrick, often ends up in the ocean).The app is now as ubiquitous as its coverage. It exists in 61 languages, and is used by satnavs of various swishy cars and by emergency services across the world. (Mr Sheldrick’s firm gets paid licence fees and now has a global team of over 100 people.) If you are ill in the Australian outback or sinking in the English Channel you will, if you ring the emergency services, probably be asked for your what3words location. It is, says Shannon Koesterer, a field paramedic in Austin, Texas, a “game-changer”. Mishearings can still happen. Homophones lurk (accents make them hard to eliminate). Consecutive consonants can cause confusion: “rivers.sing.tree” sounds very like “river.sing.tree”.The tool has also proved unexpectedly popular in Mongolia, where many people are nomadic. Ordering an Amazon delivery to your yurt used to be “virtually impossible”, says Gan Chuluun Hutagt, a Mongolian businessman, as directions used to be offered in the form of phrases like “go three miles from this well; turn [around at] that mountain”. What3words, he says, has helped Mongolia “leapfrog into the 21st century”.This quirky British app then, has saved an enormous amount of time. It also offers a strong temptation to waste it. It is ineffably pleasing to find that there is a spot in the Houses of Parliament that bears the code “reform.speech.debate”; or that a spot on the White House portico is “leaves.desk.much”. ■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in Britain, sign up to Blighty, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.