Business - Europe’s attempted bonfire of red tape is impressing no one

From CSRD to GDPR, the EU’s alphabet soup is still causing despair. A couple of years ago DP World, an Emirati ports group with vast operations in Europe, began work to meet European Union rules on sustainability reporting and due diligence. The company had to amass more than 170 different bits of data. Some, like the size of its workforce and their gender, were easy to gather. Others, like water use, less so. DP World hired consultants, expanded its sustainability team and bought new software. Then the EU decided to revise its rulebook.In a bid to make the continent a more tolerable place to do business, the European Commission is reviewing all sorts of regulations, from rules on privacy to those on environmental, social and governance (ESG) standards. The EU’s executive arm aims to cut corporate-reporting requirements by 25% overall, and more for small and medium-sized firms, by 2029.Businesses do not seem as grateful as it might have hoped, however. Some are dismayed at the prospect of rapid changes to rules that took years to draw up and comply with. A group of firms including DP World has called for “consistency, clarity and confidence”. Others complain the commission is tweaking rules that should be scrapped. Only consultancies and lobbyists, eyeing bumper business from the changes, seem happy.There is little doubt the EU, with its stagnant economy, needs to cut red tape. While China and America wage a titanic battle for tech supremacy, Europe is being left behind. In a 400-page report last year, the bloc’s unofficial chief technocrat, Mario Draghi, called the risk “existential”. The nearly 14,000 legal acts rolled out between 2019 and 2024 haven’t helped. The cost of complying with the Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive (CSRD) ranges from €150,000 ($169,000) for unlisted firms to €1m for listed ones, according to one estimate. The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) is costlier still and holds back innovation in artificial intelligence (AI), which requires reams of data. In response to the rules, EU companies have reduced their data storage and processing, relative to American peers.But the commission’s attempts at simplification, laid out in a series of “omnibus” packages, have been meagre. On ESG rules, the commission has suggested postponing deadlines and exempting more small firms. That is not enough to make Europe a much easier place to do business, and just enough to cause confusion. Big firms point out that it is tricky to provide ESG data on their supply chains if not all their suppliers do so. Small firms are not sure whether to maintain their efforts at data collection or give up. “This is more about creating the perception that now they are listening, that the EU is open for business,” says Vittorio Allegri of FTI Consulting, who was involved in the original discussions on the ESG rules.Other regulations are also being revisited. Last week the commission took its pruning shears to GDPR, suggesting an additional 38,000 small firms should be exempt from record-keeping. Henna Virkkunen, the bloc’s tech commissioner (pictured), says further changes are planned to the landmark data-privacy law. She worries that it limits innovation in AI and that differences in implementation by member states cause confusion. The fearsomely stringent AI Act, passed only last year, could be relaxed as well. In particular, Ms Virkkunen says the commission is looking at copyright rules, which need to protect creative industries while allowing sharing of content with AI developers.Amendments will need approval by the European Parliament and member states, which will take time. And anyone expecting far-reaching changes is likely to be disappointed. “We are simplifying the process but we are not rolling back,” says Ms Virkkunen. “We are very committed to the main objectives we have in these rules.”Politicians and policy wonks are grumbling. Some argue that the commission is not going far or fast enough. “Instead of an omnibus we need a Transrapid,” says Axel Voss, a member of the European Parliament. Emmanuel Macron, France’s president, has called for certain sustainability rules to be scrapped altogether.Others worry that the commission is being too hasty in an attempt to appease—and imitate—America. Its investigations into American tech giants have angered Donald Trump, who threatened (then postponed) tariffs of 50% on imports from the bloc. Republican lawmakers have argued that ESG-related rules should be treated as a non-tariff barrier in trade negotiations.“The risk for Europe is that if it tries to emulate the US too much, the one advantage it has—that its democratic institutions seem more reliable—is chipped away at,” says Zach Meyers of the Centre on Regulation in Europe, a think-tank. The Germans, of course, have a word for it. Verschlimmbesserung: an effort to improve something that simply makes it worse. ■