Finance & economics - India has a chance to cure its investment malaise

Global trade turmoil presents a rare opportunity. At a get-together entitled “Recent Global Events: Opportunities for India”, Narendra Modi, the prime minister, stressed that his government was boosting its own capital spending and called on his country’s business titans to do the same. He asked the assembled bosses to “take risk and increase investments”, according to one participant. That was in 2015.India has in many ways been transformed under Mr Modi over the past decade. But stubbornly unchanged is the private sector’s weak appetite for capital expenditure. By 2023 Mr Modi was still issuing the same call, telling bosses that the private sector “should also increase their investment, just like the government”. He made the point again earlier this year.India should, on the face of it, be enjoying a capex boom. Its home market is large and getting larger. The state is dishing out manufacturing subsidies. And the economy is growing at over 6% a year, the fastest of any big country. Yet corporate sentiment remains tepid. When Mr Modi took office in 2014 gross fixed capital formation, which includes investment by households, was 25.3% of GDP. Last year it came to 25.1%. Business investment has only once surpassed that year’s 12.6% of GDP, which was itself well below historical highs. Last year it was a mere 11.5% (see chart 1).Mr Modi promises to make India a developed economy by 2047, the centenary of its independence from Britain. For that to happen the economy will need to grow at an average rate of 7.8% a year, according to the World Bank. Number one on the institution’s to-do list is increasing capex.The government has thrown everything it can at the problem. At first, India’s lack of investment was blamed on the country’s “twin balance-sheet problem”. Firms were indebted and banks’ books were stuffed with bad loans. So the government stepped in to clean up the mess. Balance-sheets are now healthy, financing is no longer a bottleneck and interest rates are declining, having risen after the covid-19 pandemic.A national goods-and-services tax, introduced in 2017, unified India’s markets and erased most local taxes, making it more straightforward to do business across state borders. In 2019 a whopper of a corporate-tax cut slashed the effective rate from 35% to 25%. And the government has indeed splurged on capex, especially on infrastructure, in the hope that it will entice private firms to do likewise, by creating new opportunities for investment.To little avail. According to JPMorgan Chase, a bank, companies’ operating profits have surged since the tax cut, yet capex has barely budged. A recent survey by the National Statistics Office suggests it will fall outright this year.That points to one reason for India’s malaise: consumption is not growing fast enough to persuade firms to invest in new facilities. Existing factories have operated at only 70-75% capacity over the past decade, excluding a dip during the pandemic. As Vikash Kumar Jain of CLSA, a broker, puts it, “You can’t put money in something that won’t give a return.”The government has urged firms to raise wages, and has belatedly made its own moves to boost consumption, too. It announced a big tax giveaway for middle-income earners in this year’s budget. That could increase demand and allow firms to use up some spare capacity, says Ajay Chhibber of George Washington University. All the same, he adds, “the macro effect is quite small.” Salaried workers make up just a fifth of the labour force. Developing economies typically see workers move from farms to factories. But in India the share of workers in manufacturing, at 12%, is the same as it was two decades ago. Half the jobs created since the pandemic have been in agriculture.Could exports inspire capex? Even without the uncertainty of President Donald Trump’s on-again, off-again tariffs, India has struggled to sell abroad (see chart 2). Ministers have spent years trying to woo firms from China, hoping they will build factories in India—a strategy that has paid slim dividends, in part because the government has recently also raised tariffs and non-tariff barriers. The average duty, at 16%, is over a fifth higher than when Mr Modi came to power.Corporate concentration is another worry. Since 2016 the five biggest conglomerates have gained more of the market, notes Viral Acharya, a former deputy governor of the Reserve Bank of India. Protectionism helps such firms dominate at home, and thus reduces the incentive for them to seek profits abroad. Government policies are “pro-business rather than pro-market”, says Ritesh Kumar Singh of Indonomics, a consultancy. “And when you are not pro-market you are not pro-consumers.” Shoppers suffer from both higher markups and high consumption taxes.Investors considering putting money into India require assurance they will not be punished. Volkswagen, a German carmaker, was recently charged by the tax authorities with misclassifying imports. It could face a penalty of $2.8bn, which a lawyer for the company has described as a “matter of life and death” for its Indian operations. Samsung, a South Korean telecoms firm, has been asked to pay $520m for similar alleged offences. Whatever their merits, the cases send a chilling signal to investors with memories of legal battles over back taxes involving Vodafone, a British mobile-phone network, and Cairn, an energy firm from the same country.In February Mr Modi said that his government would set up a deregulation commission to reduce burdens on businesses. The global uncertainty around trade presents another opening for reform, since tough decisions can be justified by the circumstances. Indeed, Mr Trump’s return to power appears to have focused minds. Tariff reductions were announced in the budget in February. A three-year negotiation over a trade deal with Britain at last ended with an agreement in May. Talks between India and the European Union have gathered speed. Negotiators are also busy discussing terms with America.In other words, India now has a reason to open its markets, enable competition and bolster consumption. “There is a golden moment right now because the pressure is coming from outside,” says Mr Acharya. Ten years after Mr Modi’s first exhortation to invest, recent global events once again present opportunities in India. This time it might want to take them. ■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in economics, finance and markets, sign up to Money Talks, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.