Finance & economics - Soaring bond yields threaten trouble

Long-term debt is getting costlier, and not just in America. Round numbers should not matter in financial markets, but they do. How many people pay attention to where 11-year Treasury bonds are trading? So seeing yields on America’s 30-year government debt hovering near 5%, as they have been for the past few weeks, has given investors the shivers. A particularly large jump came shortly before the House of Representatives passed President Donald Trump’s “big, beautiful”—and deficit-widening—budget bill by one vote on May 22nd.It is no wonder investors are reassessing the risk of long-term lending to Uncle Sam. Even before the budget bill cuts tax revenues, America’s government has borrowed $2trn (or 6.9% of GDP) over the past year. Combined with the chaotic policymaking of recent months, and Mr Trump’s threats against America’s institutions, that has put the once-unquestionable haven status of Treasuries up for debate. And for money managers in search of safety, there is another problem. The debt of other governments looks newly risky, too: long-term yields are rising across the rich world.As American yields leapt, Britain’s 30-year borrowing cost hit 5.6%, its highest since 1998, aside from a spike in April. Germany’s got to nearly 3.2%, almost its dearest since the euro crisis of the 2010s. In intraday trading on May 21st, the yield on Japanese 30-year government bonds rose to nearly 3.2%, reaching a new record.All have since fallen back a touch. But traders remain twitchy and it would take a brave soul to bet that the climb will not soon resume. Moreover, even the small pullback owes much to the rumour mill. The reversal followed unconfirmed reports, sparked by a questionnaire about issuance sent to market participants, that Japan’s Ministry of Finance might be considering issuing fewer long-term bonds.In part, long-term borrowing costs are soaring because what happens in America does not stay in America. The country’s economy is so large, accounting for more than a quarter of the world’s output, that its outsize government deficit tilts the balance of savings and investment globally, raising the cost of capital. Higher returns on Treasuries might also lead traders to prefer them to other sovereign debt unless it, too, yields more. And it is hardly just America’s economy that Mr Trump’s policies threaten. Uncertainty about tariffs, for example, muddies the outlook for inflation and economic growth everywhere, prompting investors to demand a higher risk premium. Some might also conclude that politicians in other countries will be tempted to imitate America’s profligacy.Yet the rest of the world is also quite capable of generating pressure of its own. Some comes from good news rather than bad. Much of the rise in German borrowing costs followed an announcement in early March that its government would invest far more in defence and infrastructure. Since the popular view has long held that Germany spends too little rather than too much, this has raised expectations of its future growth, and hence the returns available on its sovereign debt.In Britain and Japan, yields are climbing for more worrying reasons. One is that inflation has again turned surprisingly hot. Consumer prices in Britain rose by 3.5% in the year to April, faster than the market had expected and well above the previous month’s reading of 2.6%. In Japan, “core” consumer prices also rose by 3.5% in the year to April, the sharpest climb since the inflationary surge in 2022 and 2023. Inflation prompts traders to bid up bond yields both because it erodes the value of their coupons and principal repayment, and because it leads them to expect higher interest rates from central bankers.At the same time, write analysts at Goldman Sachs, a bank, a structural source of demand for long-dated government debt is drying up. “Asset-liability managers”—institutions such as defined-benefit pension funds that use the fixed income streams from bonds to guarantee their future liabilities—have long been big buyers. But yields have now been high enough for them to lock in these cash flows at attractive prices for years, meaning many can afford to withdraw from the market. As the supply of bonds remains high, fuelled by fiscal deficits, this sets the stage for long-term borrowing costs to rise even more.The most obvious consequence is that public-debt burdens which have already ballooned are about to become even costlier to service. Higher bond yields do not immediately pass through to governments’ interest bills, because these depend on coupons that are fixed at the time of each bond’s issuance. They do eventually, however, as old bonds mature and must be refinanced by issuing new ones, with coupons matching prevailing market yields. America’s net government debt is nearing 100% of its GDP, meaning that a sustained rise in bond yields of one percentage point will in time cost an additional 1% of GDP per year. Japan’s net debt ratio, and hence its sensitivity to yields, is a third higher.A subtler danger, suggested by the reports of Japan’s planned issuance, is that governments are tempted to tilt their borrowing towards shorter, cheaper tenors. This might lower costs for now, but it loads the debt with even more interest-rate risk. Short-term bonds, after all, must be refinanced sooner, meaning that any future rise in yields passes through to the public finances more quickly. Had governments issued more long-term debt in the 2010s, when rates were lower, they would not have such high interest bills today.For years, the received wisdom among bond traders was that the 30-year Treasury yield “couldn’t” go much above 5%, since institutional investors would then snap up every bond in sight. That reasoning now faces a stern test—with consequences for governments everywhere. ■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in economics, finance and markets, sign up to Money Talks, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.