Business - Can Korea Inc step up?

Asia’s faded corporate star gets another chance to shine. SOUTH KOREANS would rather forget most of the past 12 months. Thousands of doctors and teachers took to the streets to air assorted grievances. Catastrophic summer floods ravaged swathes of the country. The president launched a coup, failed, was impeached and, after some constitutional confusion, removed from office. BTS remained disbanded while its K-pop heartthrobs complete their mandatory military service.Investors in South Korean businesses, too, have had little to sing of lately. Even before Donald Trump liberated the world from level-headed trade policy on April 2nd, the benchmark KOSPI 200 index of large companies had fallen by 3% relative to the start of 2024 as rival Asian bourses rose. Japan’s Nikkei 225 had gone up by 7%, and mainland China’s CSI 300 by 16%; Hong Kong’s Hang Seng and Taipei’s TWSE Taiwan 50 each leapt by nearly 40%. Between mid-July 2024 and early April 2025 shareholders in Samsung Electronics, South Korea’s corporate superstar, saw a third of its market value, or some $160bn, melt into oblivion.As summer approaches, however, the national mood may be brightening on the streets and in boardrooms alike. Doctors and teachers are back at work. A snap presidential election on June 3rd promises to usher in a modicum of political stability. Better yet, later that month BTS are planning their post-conscription reunion. Bankers and equity analysts are, for their part, beginning to hum one of the boy band’s smash hits, “Go Go”.On the surface this corporate optimism seems unwarranted. Relative to both forecast earnings and the book value of their assets, South Korean companies’ share prices continue to trail those of their rivals in the rest of the rich world, often by some distance. Stocks in more than half of the KOSPI’s 178 non-financial constituents, and the index as a whole, trade at a discount to book value. That includes Samsung Electronics, two other of its parent conglomerate’s eight listed offspring and six public subsidiaries of Lotte, the country’s most troubled chaebol.Still, the optimists may be on to something. For one thing, large South Korean businesses are clustered in industries exposed to the trendiest of 21st-century megatrends. Samsung Electronics and SK Hynix, the KOSPI’s two largest members, manufacture high-bandwidth memory (HBM) chips critical to the artificial-intelligence revolution. Samsung Biologics, ranked third by value, is a biotech powerhouse. LG Energy Solution, number four, makes batteries for the green transition. Two of the top ten manufacture electric vehicles (EVs) for climate-conscious motorists (Hyundai and Kia) and two others build weapons for war-wary governments (Hanwha Aerospace and HD Hyundai Heavy Industries).Helpfully, the South Korean firms’ competition in many of these areas is limited. Given sky-high barriers to entry in HBM manufacturing, Samsung Electronics and SK Hynix are mainly up against established producers—which is to say themselves. European allies questioning America’s trustworthiness under Mr Trump are looking for alternative suppliers of materiel. In March Poland said it would buy another 180 K2 tanks from Hyundai Rotem for $6bn, doubling its fleet of the vehicles.Korea Inc also benefits from the even greater geopolitical rift between the West and China. South Korean companies may struggle to compete head to head with Chinese EVs (from BYD), batteries (from CATL), shipyards (like CSSC) or contract drugmakers (like WuXi Biologics) on price, quality or both. But thanks to growing Western unease over hastening China’s rise by patronising its businesses, they don’t have to. And non-Chinese competitors are either weak (think American and European EVs), few (Japanese shipbuilders and battery-makers) or nonexistent (in medical contracting).There is one other, less flattering reason to hope for improvement in Korea Inc’s prospects. These had been looking so bleak for so long that the country’s political and business leaders could not ignore it any more and finally took action.A year ago the government launched the “Value-Up” programme of corporate reform. It is modelled on a similar effort starting in the early 2010s to spruce up Japan Inc. At the time the Nikkei looked as knackered as the KOSPI does now. Barely 85 of its 200-odd non-financial stocks traded above their book value. A typical one had highish net debt, of 1.7 times operating profit (before depreciation and amortisation), and free cashflow running at just 1.7% of revenue—figures close to KOSPI’s results today.Then a mix of standards and laws prompted Japanese firms to disclose more information, set performance targets, curb related-party transactions, unwind cross-shareholdings, appoint more independent directors and become less hostile to activist investors. Today the Nikkei’s price-to-book ratio averages 1.5 or so, its companies are a third less indebted and generate one and a half times as much free cash as in 2012. In February 2024 the index at last surpassed its previous peak set in December 1989. No less discerning an investor than Warren Buffett is a fan.South Korean bosses are getting the message. Although 75% of the index’s market capitalisation is in chaebol hands, the groups’ current leaders are more open to change and less legacy-obsessed than their grandfathers’ founding generation. On May 22nd Samsung Biologics said it would spin off its drug-development arm to focus on its core contracting business.Firms have begun paying higher dividends and buying back more shares. So far 120 in the KOSPI have published “Value-Up” disclosures, some even in English. Managements faced 137 shareholder proposals last year, an unprecedented third of them from activist investors. A record 24% were adopted. Go go, indeed. ■Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.