Finance & economics - The courts block Trump’s tariffs. Can he circumvent their verdict?

American trade policy is in chaos. Decades ago, when Victor Owen Schwartz first tasted cold, polished ginjo sake, it was a “light-bulb moment”, he has written. His firm, which imports alcohol to America from over a dozen countries, began adding the drink to its list. It now offers varieties from 19 breweries.But all of this was threatened when Donald Trump announced sweeping “reciprocal” tariffs on April 2nd or “Liberation Day”, as the president labelled it. The levies were touted as a remedy to America’s trade deficits. Mr Schwartz could not simply pass the cost on to buyers: he has to post his price a month in advance to regulators. Another bulb lit up: Mr Schwartz decided to fight the tariffs in court. He joined with the Liberty Justice Centre, a legal-advocacy outfit, and several other small firms, including a pipemaker, a maker of women’s cycling gear and an importer of fishing tackle.On May 28th they landed a big catch. The United States Court of International Trade ruled that Mr Trump lacked the authority to impose his reciprocal tariffs. In response to another complaint, it also ruled against “trafficking tariffs” inflicted on Canada, China and Mexico. These levies were meant to cajole leaders of the three countries into cracking down further on the flow of fentanyl, a synthetic opioid.Investors welcomed the news: futures contracts on America’s S&P 500 index jumped by 1.5%. Financial markets have repeatedly punished Mr Trump for his recklessness. On April 9th, after Treasury yields spiked, Mr Trump was persuaded to suspend the highest Liberation Day tariffs until July 9th. China’s reciprocal levy, which reached 125%, was also cut for 90 days after talks in Geneva. But even after these climbdowns, a residual 10% stayed in place on almost all of America’s trading partners, and the fentanyl tariffs remained on Canada, China and Mexico.Investors hoped their disapproval would keep America’s president in check. But they had generally not thought that Mr Trump would face opposition from the courts, too. His orders imposing the fentanyl tariffs and reciprocal levies had cited a 1977 law called the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA). It has its roots in the Trading with the Enemy Act, passed after America joined the first world war in 1917, which gives the president leeway to interfere in international economic transactions during national emergencies. Mr Trump had declared both the fentanyl situation and America’s persistent trade deficits to be such crises. Often the courts defer to the president on matters of foreign policy and national security.This deference does not apply when it comes to enforcing limits on the president’s authority that Congress has specified, the court argued. The law requires, among other things, that any measures taken “deal with” the emergency declared. The administration conceded that the fentanyl tariffs were an attempt to gain leverage over the countries in question, so they could be forced to change their behaviour. But dealing with a problem, the court said, requires a more “direct” link.While the fentanyl tariffs fell on the basis of plain English, the reciprocal tariffs were brought down by lofty constitutional principles. In recent years courts have argued that the executive branch cannot rely on ambiguous delegations of power to take actions of great consequence, a principle known as the “major-questions doctrine”. IEEPA does not mention tariffs, but does give the president the power to “regulate” imports. Relying on it to “authorise anything as unbounded” as global tariffs, the court said, was inconsistent with both the major-questions doctrine and the established idea that Congress cannot delegate its powers to the president wholesale.The administration’s power to impose universal tariffs, the court argued, is specified in a different law: the 1974 Trade Act. This permits the president to respond to balance-of-payments crises, which might include the trade deficits that so irk Mr Trump, with tariffs of up to 15% for up to 150 days. It also allows unlimited levies on specific trading partners whose trade policy the administration judges to be “unjustifiable” or to “[burden] or restrict” American firms. But such unlimited levies can only be imposed after extensive investigation, a public notice and a comment period. Importantly, Congress specified these restrictions after President Richard Nixon used the Trading with the Enemy Act to levy a temporary universal tariff in the Bretton Woods crisis of 1971—the main precedent to which Mr Trump appealed.It is to these alternative powers that Mr Trump can now be expected to turn. A universal tariff of 10% applied under the Trade Act would give the administration about five months to have the ruling overturned on appeal, during which time officials might also run Section 301 investigations to establish a country-by-country basis for tariffs. But it would be hard to investigate every trading partner at once. It seems likely that the disputes will find their way to the Supreme Court. At that point they would be presided over mostly by justices who have been strong proponents of the major-questions doctrine.The market reaction to the judgment was muted compared with the enormous falls seen after April 2nd. That is, in part, because so many investors have come to assume negotiations with America’s trading partners will result in deals which stop the “reciprocal” tariffs from ever coming into full effect. Those talks will now be muddied by the unclear nature of the administration’s authority to follow through on its threats. Indeed, analysts at Goldman Sachs, a bank, warn that trade uncertainty has increased, rather than decreased, as a consequence of the court’s decision. Unless Mr Trump has a light-bulb moment of his own, America’s importers will be doing business in the dark. ■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in economics, finance and markets, sign up to Money Talks, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.