Obituary - Simon Mann was the go-to guy for military coups and bespoke warfare

The private military contractor, aka mercenary, died on May 8th, aged 72. As his hired Hawker biz jet lurched towards the rendezvous on March 7th 2004, Simon Mann kept his gaze fixed on the instrument panel. Not the one in the cockpit. The one in his brain. If he saw just one red light, he would jack the whole thing in.The plan was to remove Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, the long-time dictator of Equatorial Guinea. Mr Mann had a team of 69 men ready, mostly ex-South African Defence Force. Old sweats hardened in bush wars and desperate to fight. They would meet to load weapons in Harare, Zimbabwe’s capital, and fly to Malabo, the capital of EG. There they would meet a plane carrying the new ruler, Severo Moto (known as “the priest”) from exile in Spain. While Mr Obiang was woken up with tea and handcuffs, they would escort Mr Moto to the palace. As thanks, they would get a large cut of EG’s oil rights. Piece of cake.Yet he longed for that red light. Snag after snag had hit the project. People in the know had leaked like sieves. And he had never before acted against “the heads”, the ruling government. Despite that, every light, each one a high-placed snout in a different country, was green, saying GO-GO-GO. Get a bloody move on!He always felt that way before an op. Sweaty, trembling. Sick to his stomach. Yet he was good at them. In 1993 in Angola he and his oil-company boss Tony Buckingham had won back the city of Soyo from UNITA, rebels against the former Marxist (but internationally recognised) regime. This had not only led to a ceasefire. It also saved his and Tony’s Soyo-connected company, Heritage Oil and Gas, and put them in high favour with the government. They made millions from this useful intervention, and he bought a beautiful house near Beaulieu once owned by the Rothschilds.By then he part-ran two private military companies. Their names, Executive Outcomes and Sandline International, were glossy. But the work was private warfare. Ex-soldiers swarmed to join; 2,000 on his list, 3,000 waiting. In 1995 he and they cleared rebel forces out of the diamond fields of Sierra Leone. Again they won warm thanks from the government, though payment in full was hard to extract and the rebels returned. In 1997 they hoped to win back the solid-copper island of Bougainville for the government of Papua New Guinea, but were deported first. PNG’s loss.What was he doing in this line of work? Why was he there? He could have gone into brewing, the family’s fortune. But soldiering had seized him. His father and grandfather had both excelled in war. Nanny took him to look at bomb sites and watch the Changing of the Guard. She also encouraged him to read books of derring-do: John Buchan, Hornblower. At Eton, maps of benighted lands appealed far more than lessons.He got a commission in the Scots Guards. But the army disappointed him. He wanted more action; worthy dragons to slay. Not so much of Her Majesty’s Regulations. At White’s club when he was 21 he met the founder of the Special Air Service (SAS), Britain’s elite and semi-secret fighting force. They talked of a coup in the Seychelles. Eagerly, he signed on; at 27 he joined officially. He liked their philosophy of operations: Do whatever it takes.The word “mercenary” troubled him, though. He kept testing his motivations. Was he just a brute and badass, like Mike Hoare and his men in Congo in the 1960s? No. He liked money, sure. But most regular soldiers signed up for the money, too. They were not patriots first. Armies had also used private workers since for ever to help behind the lines. Privateers were sent to capture Spanish ships. If a house was burning, and the municipality could not or would not send a fire engine, what was wrong with a private company dousing the flames for money? His men were not unaccountable. He took only trained soldiers, and they had to stick to the rules they had learned. They sometimes asked him what sort of mercenaries they were, being so bloody well behaved.Doing good was the excuse he clung to. In Equatorial Guinea in 2004 the people were impoverished under Mr Obiang’s rule. More than half had no access to clean water. The mortality rate for newborns was nearly one in ten. Yet the place was awash with petrodollars. He saw no reason not to putsch the bastard. The man they were installing would be better and very, very grateful.Sadly, though, this op was a shambles. A monster child. After the plane had landed in Harare they were all arrested. (Betrayed by the CIA, he thought.) He was handcuffed, put in shackles and taken to a holding shed. Continual beatings followed. Once sentenced, he went to Chikurubi prison in Harare for three and a half years; then to Black Beach prison in Malabo, to serve 32 years. After less than two, he was released and thrown out of the country.That op was his last. It had a distasteful tail, when he defended Mr Obiang and his spendthrift son Teddy in a French court in 2017. That, and repentance, and his naming of dissidents when in prison, seemed obvious quid pro quos for getting out early.The failed coup also brought both ridicule and fame. In a letter to his wife Amanda from Chikurubi, he mentioned that only “a large splodge of wonga!” [cash] would get him out. He imagined that Mark Thatcher, son of the former prime minister, terrier-eager to help, might offer it. But he never came through. And his presence, once revealed, exploded the story into scandal. Mr Mann was now the star of the “Wonga Coup”, a scruffy figure in prison shorts and glasses. Hands still grubby with bribes and guns. A famous mercenary in the worst reading of the word.His memoir in 2011 tried to adjust that. Being a mercenary was like mountain-climbing. He was flattered to be asked to go. He yearned for danger and adventure. Setbacks would not deter him, once he had the top of the mountain in view. He watched for the red light—even hoped for it. But his heart leapt at the green. His book’s title gave the clue, from Shakespeare’s “Julius Caesar“: “Cry ‘Havoc!’ And let slip the dogs of war.” ■