Culture - Museums should open up their storerooms

The V&A is putting more of its collection on show. Others should follow suit. IN MUSEUMS’ STOREROOMS, disparate bits of history are brought together. Jesus, rendered in marble, peeks out of a wooden crate; nearby, Napoleon is proud in bronze, but bound by a safety harness. Famous faces are stored alongside forgotten ones. Dante and Nero rub shoulders with a 16th-century Venetian man.For many museums, the items in storage are out of sight and out of mind. But the Victoria and Albert Museum (V&A) is giving people the chance to browse the eclectic contents of its vaults. On May 31st the V&A East Storehouse, a new facility, will open in the Olympic Park in London. The building will hold more than half a million works, meaning that around 25% of the V&A’s 2.8m items will now be publicly accessible, up from 2%.Treasures and oddments of art and design are arranged across four floors. Visitors can peer at plates, paintings and nearly 900 puppets. There are 1,500 chairs—shaped like thrones, eggs and even cabbages—and 3,500 pairs of shoes.Storehouse is no dusty cellar: open racks and glass walkways offer glimpses of treasures from every angle. Nor is it a typical museum. There are rails, boxes and garment bags. Artefacts are strapped to shelves, dust sheets cover precious furniture and pairs of shoes nestle in tissue paper. Lights are controlled by motion sensors to reduce items’ exposure and delicate textiles are stored in dark cupboards to stop them from fading. The idea, the v&a says, is to take visitors behind the scenes of the museum’s collection.Institutions have long had to strike a balance between storage and exhibition, notes Steven Lubar, a professor of history at Brown University. When the first public museums opened in the 17th and 18th centuries, everything was put on show. But collections soon grew and many items were subsequently consigned to basements or warehouses. For a time institutions such as the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, let the public wander through their storerooms. But by the mid-20th century, collections had become the preserve of curators and select researchers.Now, amid complaints that too many interesting artefacts are being kept in the dark, museums have started opening up their stores again. The Boijmans van Beuningen Museum in Rotterdam opened the first public art depot in 2021, which contains some 150,000 artworks. The British Museum has pledged to make 1.3m objects more available to scholars and the public as part of its new Archaeological Research Collection in Reading.The V&A’s new outpost is a particularly stylish example of how it can be done. The building is designed to remove the barriers between people and objects, says Kate Parsons, head of collections care and access. On a viewing platform visitors can watch conservators at work; anyone can “Order an Object” and have it brought to them. (The project gave staff an opportunity to audit the collection—objects have barcodes and detailed digital records.)Small displays draw visitors towards particular artefacts, such as a suffragette’s scarf or a tiara made from fish scales. There are large installations, too, such as a section of the Agra Colonnade, a structure from the Mughal empire. In September the David Bowie Centre will open, displaying the musician’s archive for the first time.All this will draw crowds. The V&A expects 250,000 people a year to visit Storehouse, compared with the 3,000 who thought to book an appointment to visit the old stores. Like the V&A, it will be free to visit, though people will have to pay to gain entry to special exhibitions.No doubt many museums would like to have something similar to make use of their mountains of stuff. Such buildings, however, come at a cost. Storehouse and the nearby V&A East Museum, which will display modern culture and design when it opens in 2026, amount to the biggest museum development in Britain in decades, reportedly costing more than £100m ($135m). A government grant funded the V&A’s move from its former stores. The rest of the budget came from fundraising, the museum says.The V&A hopes Storehouse will attract paying members. (The museum already has more than 200,000.) If you “let people closer” to objects, and “they grow to understand and appreciate them,” says Tim Reeve, the museum’s deputy director, they are more likely to support an institution.Perhaps. Many visitors will simply enjoy the sheer range of items on display, from a section of a Brutalist housing estate to Rajasthani nose rings. Each floor is intriguing, for you have no idea what is in store. ■For more on the latest books, films, TV shows, albums and controversies, sign up to Plot Twist, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter