Culture - “American Dirt”, and how commerce beats cancel culture

The author of a controversial smash-hit novel is back. Publishing a novel is a queasy, exposing business for its author. Suddenly strangers have views about characters who once existed only in your head. If the book is a success, even people who haven’t read it are liable to hold opinions of it—and of you.Commercially, “American Dirt”, published in 2020, was exceptionally successful. It was also extremely controversial. Now its bruised, brave author, Jeanine Cummins (pictured), is back with a new title, “Speak to Me of Home”. Her books offer a concise parable of the cultural turmoil of the past five years: a tale of myopic activism, strife on the internet and in the arts, cancellation and the cancellers’ comeuppance.In “American Dirt”, a mother and son flee Acapulco after a cartel slaughters their relatives. Ambushed by horrors and occasional kindnesses, they ride the roofs of freight trains and pay a coyote to smuggle them to el norte. Much hyped in advance, the book met a commensurate backlash. Since she was neither Mexican nor a migrant, who was Ms Cummins to write about these experiences? “Trauma porn” was a favourite disparagement. Her publicity tour was called off amid the vitriol. Critics dressed her down on “Oprah’s Book Club”, a talk show.The flaw in these objections was less substance than scale. It was fair to point to clichés and distortions in “American Dirt” (though lots of critics seemed to forget it was a story set in Mexico, not an encyclopedia). But some went much further, calling it “dangerous” and “harmful”. The wild vocabulary reflected the belief, axiomatic in parts of the left, that political wrongs are all linked on a continuum of guilt, such that uttering a clumsy word can make you complicit in violence. An infelicity in a novel becomes a heinous act of colonialism.This intolerant, deluded outlook has alienated lots of moderates from causes they might otherwise support. And the brouhaha was typical of the past few years in a different way: it was not a clash between friends and foes of migrants but among their avowed supporters. The book’s heroine marvels at those who “venture into tremendous peril, risking their very lives, all for the chance to get to the dream of some faraway country that doesn’t even want them”. The well-meaning message, as Ms Cummins put it, was that “these people are people.”Today, the waste and cost of this blue-on-blue bust-up, and many others like it, are stark. While cliques of lefties and liberals quarrelled over language, America elected a government that wants to crush diversity initiatives and deport millions. The idea that Ms Cummins ever counted as a villain looks absurd. It always was.The furore left a mark. Publishers are more aware of diversity among staff and authors—and more cautious. Fearing charges of “cultural appropriation”, writers are anxious about imagining lives unlike their own. Yet in a narrow sense, the activists failed. “American Dirt” was a smash hit, selling over 4m copies worldwide. Oddly, its readers were unmoved by the internet jeremiads. Thus the affair captured another recent lesson: the online world, in which everyone seems to agree with you, is not the real world.Ms Cummins’s new novel shares themes with its predecessor, such as parenting, grief, lives and families that straddle borders—in this case between Puerto Rico and the mainland—and the shimmery allure of America (a man “harboured some romantic notions” of New York, “the same way everyone did until they went there”). A family saga rather than a thriller, it encompasses several generations and time frames, tracing the impact on the clan of fateful mishaps: a financial bust, an aneurysm, a car crash. Its deep subject is the rolling fallout of migration, as the ache and alienation of the first generation, and the neuroses of the next, bleed into the ethnic self-assertion of today’s.There is a hint of penance here. Chastised for her outmoded approach to identity, a character resolves that she “will face her own discomfort and she will learn”. By focusing on Puerto Ricans and Irish-Americans—two strands of her own lineage—Ms Cummins has played it safe. Still, she is entitled to tell whichever stories she chooses. The main point about “Speak to Me of Home” is that it is out there.Commerce beat the cancellers; that is the final moral of this literary parable. As some of those cancellers griped, the market is indeed a faulty means to match reward with talent. But when it comes to determining what people get to read, it is better than leaving it up to them.■Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.