Leaders - The best part of the UK-EU deal is a system for doing more deals 

Sir Keir Starmer’s “reset” is still a hard Brexit. It will need softening. Fans and foes of this week’s agreement between Britain and the European Union have made hugely exaggerated claims about it. Sir Keir Starmer heralded it as historic and the start of a new era. The prime minister’s opponents accused him of betraying Brexit or of killing it altogether. The truth is that the deal sensibly, if modestly, reduces some of the worst trade frictions introduced after Britain’s exit from the EU five years ago. And it adds a new pact to work together on rebuilding Europe’s defences, an urgent task given Russian aggression and American equivocation. But this “reset” is neither historic nor an act of betrayal. Brexit remains “hard”.Alongside defence, the main agreement was for Britain to align with EU food standards, thereby easing frictions that have hit exports hard. Linking carbon-adjustment and electricity schemes will also help trade. A planned youth-mobility programme should benefit both sides, as will Britain’s promise to consider rejoining the Erasmus+ student-exchange scheme. The same goes for closer co-operation on data exchange through the Europol policing agency. Sir Keir reckons the overall package may boost Britain’s economy by about £9bn ($12bn) in 2040: that is only 0.3% of GDP, but for a sluggish economy it is still welcome.This being a trade negotiation, both sides made concessions. Sir Keir rolled over the EU’s access to British fishing waters for 12 extra years, to 2038, outraging many fishermen. His alignment with EU food regulations means accepting rules which Britain has very little say in making, and some role for the European Court of Justice. Against this, aligning with food rules simplifies trade between Great Britain and Northern Ireland. And Britain retains the freedom to strike trade deals with third countries, as it has just done with America and India.The claim by Kemi Badenoch, leader of the Conservatives, that this is a sell-out is absurd. Sir Keir has stuck to all three red lines that Labour put in its party manifesto last year: no single market, no customs union and no free movement of people. Indeed, for most of the period after 2016, when Britain voted to leave the EU, this version of Brexit would have been deemed to be “hard” not “soft”. Voters were sold a vision in which swashbuckling post-Brexit Britain would be global and deregulated at the same time as it set its own rules to control trade and immigration. Acknowledging that this outcome was always a fantasy is not a betrayal, but the welcome intrusion of reality.Ms Badenoch is also ignoring a shift in public opinion. Most voters now think the vote to leave was a mistake. A majority, even in Nigel Farage’s Reform UK, favour closer relations with Brussels. So do most business groups.EU leaders seem pleased not because they think they have won a battle but because they want closer relations with an important partner. This is clearest in defence, since building a credible European system of security requires not just more money but also the full participation of one of the continent’s military powers. Warmer relations also increase the chances of further improvements in the Brexit deal.What next? This week’s agreement is really a road map to a deal: years of negotiations now lie ahead. Perhaps its best feature was to establish a system of annual summits, with working parties implementing future deals. This framework could eventually even lead to a re-examination of Sir Keir’s red lines. A future government may have a mandate to trade off sovereignty against membership of the customs union.The direction of travel towards a closer relationship is now set. Other countries in Europe that are not members of the EU are working their way along a similar course. Norway is starting a new debate about joining the club. The Swiss have spent over 30 years negotiating every detail of their relationship. Post-Brexit Britain must get used to that, too. ■Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.