United States - How much worse could America’s measles outbreak get?

Our charts show how falling vaccination rates could lead to a surge in cases. AMERICA’S MEASLES outbreak is alarming for several reasons. What began as a handful of cases in Texas in January has now exceeded 800 across several states, with many more cases probably going unreported. It is the worst outbreak in 30 years and has already killed three people. Other, smaller outbreaks bring the total number of cases recorded in 2025 so far to over 1,000. But above all, public-health experts worry that the situation now is a sign of worse to come. Falling vaccination rates and cuts to public-health services could make such outbreaks more frequent and impossible to curb, eventually making measles endemic in the country again.Currently, measles is considered “eliminated” in America, meaning that outbreaks start from imported cases and end within 12 months (to be endemic, a disease must be present in a country year-round). Typically, imported cases lead to just a few new infections because vaccination rates in most places are high enough to prevent further spread. Occasionally, though, imported cases will hit a pocket—such as a neighbourhood or county—where too few people are jabbed. If that is a crowded area with many children per family and lots of social mingling (at church, for example) an outbreak can grow very big very fast. The largest outbreaks of the past 20 years have all been in such places: close-knit religious communities, such as Amish or Orthodox Jewish ones, where misinformed fears about vaccine safety had taken hold.The hotspot of the current outbreak is a Mennonite community in Gaines County, Texas. More than 400 cases have been reported in the county so far. Its source (or “patient zero”) has not been identified, but measles cases linked to that outbreak have turned up in nearby counties and in several other states. Cases in Gaines County exploded because only 81% of children starting school there have received the MMR vaccine (which gives protection against measles, mumps and rubella). With a disease as contagious as measles, 95% vaccine coverage is needed to stop it from spreading.Few places have vaccination rates as low as in Gaines, but the number of counties where too few children have had the MMR jab is growing. In February researchers from Johns Hopkins University published an analysis of MMR rates in kindergarten-age children in the 37 states that make county-level data available. They found that in the 2022-24 school years, two thirds of counties had MMR rates lower than 95%. Worryingly, the data show a widespread decline in vaccination. Around a third of the counties that are now below the threshold had been above it in the 2017-2020 school years, and the median county vaccination rate has fallen in most states. One of the largest drops is in Wisconsin, which is among the most permissive states for vaccine exemptions in schools—no county in Wisconsin has an MMR vaccination rate above 85%.What will be the outcome of falling vaccination rates? A study published in JAMA, the journal of the American Medical Association, in April, estimated that, if current childhood vaccination rates remain unchanged, after two decades measles will probably become endemic in America again. Under these circumstances, there will be an estimated 850,000 measles cases in the next 25 years, and around 850 deaths. If, however, the MMR rate in each state falls by 10%, the point when measles becomes endemic will arrive earlier and there could be 11m measles cases in the 25-year period. In that scenario there would be around 11,000 deaths from the disease, each of which could have been avoided. ■To read a more detailed story visit our Graphic detail page.Stay on top of American politics with The US in brief, our daily newsletter with fast analysis of the most important political news, and Checks and Balance, a weekly note from our Lexington columnist that examines the state of American democracy and the issues that matter to voters.