China - China’s universities are wooing Western scientists

And they are reaching beyond academics with Chinese heritage. Charles lieber had few options. On April 28th the renowned former Harvard chemist took up a new post at Tsinghua University’s Shenzhen campus. Mr Lieber had been looking for a perch after he was convicted in America in 2021 for hiding ties to Chinese research funding. He is one of a handful of senior Western scholars who have recently taken up posts in China. Others have done so more from a position of choice.The websites of Peking University and Tsinghua University, respectively, recently confirmed that Gérard Mourou, a French Nobel-prizewinning physicist, and Kenji Fukaya, a decorated Japanese mathematician, were joining their faculties. This month Alex Lamb, an ai researcher, confirmed he was leaving a lab at Microsoft in New York for Tsinghua’s new ai college. “I think that Tsinghua is a very good university,” Mr Lamb wrote in an email. “The quality of the undergraduate students is extremely strong and Tsinghua’s ability to recruit strong graduate students is rapidly improving.”The scholars join a dozen leading scientists of Chinese heritage who have recently left Western colleges for China. They include Sun Song, a star mathematician at the University of California Berkeley, who moved to Zhejiang University, home of DeepSeek, an ai firm. “‘Talent’ is becoming as important a core goal of central planning to Beijing as ‘workers’ were under Mao,” wrote Jeroen Groenewegen and Antonia Hmaidi for merics, a European think-tank. In 2021, Xi Jinping set a goal to make China attract global talent by 2030 and be the top destination for the brightest by 2035. Recruiting from the West focuses on two groups: a small number of senior researchers like Mr Mourou, and a greater number of early-career bright sparks, like Mr Lamb. At a big Communist Party meeting in 2024, China’s leadership said it would refocus its efforts to attract foreign scholars, including by making it easier for skilled workers to move there. Universities have been more active in promoting national scholarship funds established in 2021 to woo foreigners.President Donald Trump’s re-election has caused a growing number of Western scholars to look east, says Yu Xie of Princeton University. More than half of the post-doctoral students in America are foreign, many of them Chinese. During Mr Trump’s first term, America’s justice department investigated many researchers with links to China, including Mr Lieber. Many of the cases failed in court, but had a chilling effect. More than half of Chinese and Chinese-American researchers thought about leaving America, says Mr Yu, and it is likely a few hundred did so.This time Mr Trump casts a broader shadow. He is reportedly planning $23bn in cuts over the next fiscal year to government-funded science. That is on top of a campaign against higher education, challenging the academic independence of institutions such as Harvard by holding their federal grants hostage. China’s state media recently crowed that uncertainty in America “is causing a broader community of scientists to lose confidence in building their careers there”.Funding cuts are forcing difficult trade-offs on scientists looking to continue their work. Though the gap between America and China in innovation has shrunk, China’s research ecosystem is still bureaucratic and hierarchical, and lacks true intellectual freedom. And disaffected boffins in America do have other choices. The European Union said on May 5th that it will spend €500m ($566m) courting them.■Subscribers can sign up to Drum Tower, our new weekly newsletter, to understand what the world makes of China—and what China makes of the world.