Asia - On its own terms, ASEAN is surprisingly effective

The group has helped keep countries from each others’ throats. IT HAS at times been hard for Banyan to be a fan of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN). The Economist is plain-spoken; the ten-country club has an irritating habit of talking around the big issues. We are not the only ones who have been frustrated by the bloc’s reserve. Activists decry its refusal to condemn the human-rights records of its more abusive members. China hawks bristle at its reluctance to call out by name its pushy neighbour to the north. It is not much of an economic bloc. When ASEAN convenes in Kuala Lumpur this week for its twice-annual summit, Banyan may sympathise with those complaining that it isn’t doing what they want it to do—or appearing to do very much at all.For all that, ASEAN gets too little credit. Judged not by the yardsticks of others but rather according to the interests of its own members, it is often quietly effective. On flashpoints, such as the South China Sea and the civil war in Myanmar, members have diverse views. Yet membership of the bloc at least keeps them from actively working against each other’s interests. ASEAN’s grey, consensus-based incrementalism is never going to shake the world. Without it, though, the region would be more divided or exploited by bigger powers.What do critics get wrong about ASEAN? One common claim is that its positions are invariably reduced to the views of the most timid or the most stubborn member. That is not quite right. Increasingly, the bloc tends to coalesce around the median stance of its members. Take the contest over the South China Sea. The Philippines has sought to get the organisation to object strongly to China’s bullying of its vessels. But other members do a lot of business with China and care much less about distant maritime disputes. Landlocked Laos, in thrall to China, seeks to get the group to blame America for tensions.ASEAN hasn’t backed the Philippines’ view—but it hasn’t adopted the position of Laos, either. It criticises aggression in the South China Sea. Even though it is mealy-mouthed about naming China as the aggressor, there is no mystery about the culprit’s identity. Requests by Laos and other China dependants to blame “outside powers” (ie, America) for the tensions are routinely rejected.Another common criticism is of the bloc’s principle of “non-interference”: the idea that member countries will not get involved in each other’s domestic affairs, however brutally managed they may be. Yet this view is out of date. After Myanmar’s army seized power in 2021 and started massacring civilian protesters, some ASEAN members, among them Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore, were outspoken in their objections to the coup. They helped persuade fellow members to ban the junta chief, General Min Aung Hlaing, from the group’s summits, while calling firmly for an end to the violence. ASEAN will not formally expel the junta—or seat its pro-democratic opponents, for that matter. Myanmar’s lower-ranking officials still attend some meetings. The junta has not been suspended. But it can no longer veto decisions and its views carry little weight.One reason the club is willing to freeze Myanmar out is because it helps keep bigger countries outside ASEAN constructively engaged with the region. The club has become an unrivalled convener in Asia of bigger powers. America, China, India and Russia all send top leaders to the annual East Asia Summit, hosted by whichever country happens to be holding ASEAN’s rotating chair. ASEAN shapes the summit agenda, as well as the language used to address big regional problems. This is a crucial aspect of its soft power.Two other points are often missed, but are key. First, in a region rife with family political networks, familiar ties among leaders count. Family political dynasties nearly always bode ill for governance at home. But, like it or not, the fact that six of the nine leaders coming to Kuala Lumpur are the children of former leaders who once made deals over golf means there is a degree of ease in the new generation’s dealings with each other.Second—and try not to yawn—but a crucial and rarely acknowledged corps of regional diplomats keeps the ASEAN show on the road. Unseen, they lend ASEAN vital ballast and, not least, deepen familiarity among neighbours who once had remarkably little to do with each other. If ASEAN has kept its relevance, it is to them that much of the credit goes.■