Middle East & Africa - The world’s worst conference

Hell on earth in Dubai-on-the-Med. “Libya build” was billed as the largest construction expo ever to have been held in north Africa. It lured businessmen from China, Turkey and Malta. But as they arrived on May 12th, mortars began falling. Gunmen in trucks fitted with heavy machineguns opened fire, seizing control of half of the capital, Tripoli. Burnt-out cars littered the streets. Schools, markets and banks shut their gates. Militiamen broke into the central bank. And someone stole the gazelles from Tripoli’s zoo. Britain quietly reversed its travel advice, eased a month earlier, and cautioned against all trips to Tripoli. Ships in the port have hurried away. Turkey, a key government ally, has airlifted its citizens to safety.Efforts in Tripoli to reset the country after the overthrow of Muammar Qaddafi in the Arab spring of 2011 are faltering again. The stalemate between the internationally recognised government in the west, led by Abdul Hamid Dbeibeh, and Khalifa Haftar, a strongman who with his sons rules the east, has been broken. A conflict that most assumed was dormant has erupted into its worst violence for five years. Despite his international recognition, Mr Dbeibeh was always the weakest of the two. Unlike the Haftars, he was a construction tycoon, not a warlord. His hold on power depends on an edgy coalition of militias. When they grew restive, he challenged them. After some initial success, he has failed.The immediate cause of the strife is money. Mr Dbeibeh and his family have emptied the coffers of what should be Africa’s oil-richest state. Falling oil prices mean they have not been replenished. As Mr Dbeibeh’s pay-offs shrank, the militias grew rebellious and looked for alternative revenue streams, such as holding hostage the bosses of utility companies. Fearing his rule was under threat, Mr Dbeibeh’s guards invited Abdul Ghani al-Kikli, perhaps the most notorious militia leader, for a meeting on May 12th and killed him. They then turned on the capital’s biggest gang, the Special Deterrence Force (Rada), a Salafist force that controls Tripoli’s prime airport and its most populous neighbourhood. But Rada fought back until it held half the city.Most Tripolitanians are fed up. They are tired of a leader whose greed has punctured the promise of Dubai-on-the-Med. They are exhausted by the wait for elections, promised for 10 months after the un appointed him caretaker prime minister in February 2021. Many see Mr Dbeibah as one of the fulul, or remnants of the Qaddafi regime. After a ceasefire welcomed by the un on May 14th, thousands of protesters poured into the streets, echoing the same demands that they often made against the Qaddafis in 2011: an end to the regime, elections and a reunification of east and west.The Haftars are weighing their chances of exploiting discontent in the west. They already control the parliament in the east, most oilfields and some 80% of the country (see map). Their bloody siege of the capital failed in 2020, but they have since wooed allies in the hope of a comeback. Their supporters in Zawiya and Zintan are said to be on the move. And there are reports of a mobilisation at Sirte in the centre and Ghadames on the Algerian border, perhaps to distract armed groups who hitherto sided with Mr Dbeibeh. At a session of parliament on May 19th in Benghazi, Libya’s second city and the Haftars’ stronghold, representatives declared Mr Dbeibeh “illegitimate” and proposed replacements. Fearful that a reckoning looms, some of Mr Dbeibeh’s ministers have resigned.The Libyan prime minister is said to have sent his family to London, but he is clinging to office. Desperate to appear in control, he has summoned henchmen from his hometown of Misrata to secure the streets. They are said to have shot protesters. With the capital’s main airport still under Rada’s control, he has reopened Tripoli’s mothballed international airport for the first time in years. He vows to turn Mr Kikli’s Tripoli barracks into a park and rid the capital of its remaining militias, or, as he calls them, “blackmailers, criminals” and “sharks”. But without them, his hold could grow even more fragile. Libyans and foreign diplomats have begun to speak of his rule in the past tense. At least with the airport reopened he has a way to escape. ■Sign up to the Middle East Dispatch, a weekly newsletter that keeps you in the loop on a fascinating, complex and consequential part of the world.