Business - Big box v brands: the battle for consumers’ dollars

American retailers are slugging it out with their suppliers. DURING WALMART’S latest earnings call on May 15th, Doug McMillon stated the obvious. “The higher tariffs will result in higher prices,” the big-box behemoth’s chief executive told analysts, referring to Donald Trump’s levies on imports of just about anything from just about anywhere. Who’d have thought? Two days later the president weighed in with an alternative idea. Walmart (and China, where many of those imports come from) should “EAT THE TARIFFS”, he posted on social media. Mr McMillon did not respond publicly to the suggestion. But it is likely to be a polite, lower-case “Thanks, but no thanks.”Walmart is not the only large American retailer that can afford to turn down the unhappy meal. Earlier this month Amazon hinted that prices of goods in its e-emporium could edge up as the levies bite. Costco, a lean membership-only bulk discounter which reports its quarterly earnings on May 29th, will probably not be taking up Mr Trump’s offer, either. This week Home Depot, America’s fourth-most-valuable retailer behind those three, said that while it was not planning to raise prices just yet, it expects to maintain its current operating margin. This implies its suppliers will absorb much of the cost of tariffs.Not even the artificial-intelligence revolution seems to whet investors’ appetite as much as the ability to preserve profits in times of economic uncertainty. The giant retailers’ shares trade at multiples of future earnings that put big tech to shame. Home Depot’s is on a par with Meta’s. Walmart’s beats both Microsoft’s and Nvidia’s. Costco’s is nearly twice that of Apple. Amazon, with fingers in both pies, is just behind Walmart. Tasty.Despite Walmart’s warning about everyday not-so-low prices, it is not shoppers who bear the brunt of its pricing power. It is, as in Home Depot’s case, suppliers. Retail firms can increasingly dictate terms not just to nameless providers of nuts-and-bolts products (including, at the home-improvement store, actual nuts and bolts) but also to once-mighty brands, from Nike to Nestlé. Do not be fooled by their single-digit operating margins, just over half those of their typical vendor. Their slice of the profits from the $5trn-plus that American consumers splurge annually on physical products is growing.Estimating the retailers’ profit pool is straightforward. Start with the Census Bureau’s tally of American retail spending (excluding cars and petrol). This is, by definition, the money that ends up in shop tills. Multiply it by the industry’s overall operating margin, which can be approximated by looking at the revenue-weighted average of all listed retailers. Last year the figures were $5trn and 7.2%, giving $360bn in retail profits. Calculating vendors’ revenues requires a few more assumptions, such as that 90% of retailers’ cost of goods sold ends up with consumer-goods firms. This implies perhaps $3.2trn in sales and, given the average consumer-goods operating margin of 12.6% last year, a profit pool that is a shade over $400bn.On this rough reckoning, then, manufacturers grab a little over half of the two groups’ combined profits. But this is down from three-fifths in the late 2010s. A narrower but more sophisticated analysis by Zhihan Ma of Bernstein, a broker, which focuses on food, hygiene and household products but excludes durable goods, yields a directionally similar result: over the past 15 years retailers’ profit share has risen from 34% to 38%. Having lagged behind consumer-goods stocks between 2000 and 2015, their shares have since handily outperformed them, too.The main reason for retailers’ growing clout is competition. For established brands this is fiercer than ever. On one side they are squeezed by upstart labels, which can easily outsource production to contract manufacturers and market their wares on TikTok: think hip Warby Parker spectacles or hideous Allbirds trainers. When the economy looked healthy and money was cheap, brand owners could counteract some of this by snapping up the challengers. With interest rates, uncertainty and the risk of recession all up, dealmaking is the last thing on CEOs’ minds.On the other side brands feel the pinch from retailers’ own private labels. These are no longer slapped just on low-margin goods like toilet paper. Best Buy, an electronics retailer, sells fancy own-brand refrigerators for $1,699. Wayfair flogs $7,800 sofas. Sam’s Club, Walmart’s Costco-like membership arm, even offers a five-carat diamond engagement ring for a bargain $144,999.Even as shoppers enjoy ever more choice of what to buy, their options of where to buy it are becoming more limited. Although America’s retail industry remains fragmented compared with the cosy oligopolies found in many rich countries, it is consolidating fast. Between 1990 and 2020 the share of food sales claimed by the four biggest retailers more than doubled, to some 35%.A federal court’s decision last year to block the $25bn merger of Kroger and Albertsons, two big supermarkets, is scant comfort to vendors. They remain beholden to big retailers, especially Walmart, which accounts for a quarter of Americans’ grocery spending. Suppliers including Nestlé, PepsiCo and Unilever have set up offices next door to its headquarters in Bentonville, Arkansas. Walmart has no similar outposts in that trio’s hometowns of Vevey, Switzerland, Purchase, New York, and London.During the last price shock, amid the covid-19 pandemic in 2021, consumer-goods firms could at least console themselves that stuck-at-home shoppers flush with stimulus cheques were willing to spend a bit more on branded goods. Their margins duly edged up that year. Now Mr Trump’s tariffs are about to hit just as consumer confidence is depressed. If they seek any retail therapy at all, it will be from Amazon, Costco and Walmart. ■Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.