Obituary - Ed Smylie knew this stick-fast wonder could fix anything

The NASA engineer who saved the crew of Apollo 13 died on April 21st, aged 95. Is there anything duct tape can’t do? It can seal up a box, mend a boot and reinforce a bumper; it can give a book a spine, lag pipes and stick bunting to a tricky corner. Enthusiasts have proved that it can also suspend a small car, replace the whole skin of a light aircraft, be woven into a plausible raft and make a fully functional trebuchet. And all without the need for scissors. In “A Prairie Home Companion”, Garrison Keillor’s much-loved radio show, it also slimmed waists. Each broadcast would include a message from the American Duct Tape Council, announcing another miracle cure with the sign-off “Thanks, duct tape!”Ed Smylie did not invent this wonder. That was the achievement of Vesta Stoudt from Illinois, a world-war-two ammunition-packer who worried that the paper seals on the boxes were too unreliable for soldiers to open under fire. But it made him extremely famous for a few heart-stopping days in April 1970, winning him and his team the Presidential Medal of Freedom and a public mention from President Nixon himself. Twenty-five years later, his dealings with duct tape were reprised in the film “Apollo 13”. That was all hammed up for cinema, with a lot of hollering and screaming that didn’t happen in real life; but the story was a good one. It was Mr Smylie who got his team to invent a device that saved the crew of a stricken spacecraft 200,000 miles from Earth, and all because he spotted “tape” on the craft’s stowage list.He had long been a fan of it. As a southern boy, growing up in rural Mississippi, he absorbed an immovable principle: if a thing wouldn’t move when it was supposed to, use WD40; if it moved when it wasn’t supposed to, use duct tape. The heresy no self-respecting southern boy would utter was: “I don’t think duct tape will fix it.” Once he saw the word “tape”, on the stowage list—suggestively, the 113th item listed—he knew they were home free, however big the problem.And it was big enough. Fifty-six hours into the mission, on April 13th, an oxygen tank on the spacecraft exploded. It was quickly empty; then the second one, too, began to leak. It was the first-ever emergency on a manned spaceflight. The command module had to be shut down, and the three men on board, Jim Lovell, Jack Swigert and Fred Haise, moved into the lunar module to breathe the oxygen there. But there were too many of them, and not enough canisters of lithium hydroxide (a carbon-dioxide scrubber) to filter three men‘s exhalations. Unless a way could be found to purify the air in the lunar module, all of them would die.Mr Smylie was at home in Houston, relaxing and watching evening TV, when a message interrupted the programme. It was calm and not alarmist, but it said—as Mr Lovell famously, and calmly, told Mission Control—that they had “had a problem here”. Those words marked the end of Mr Smylie’s sleep, except in brief shifts, for the next two days. At first he thought he could just siphon in lithium hydroxide from the command module. But that was shut down; and the scrubbers were not interchangeable. In the command module, they were square bricks; in the lunar module they were cylindrical. Another simple proverb that sprang to his mind was that you couldn’t put a square peg into a round hole. He and his team had to find another way.Working through the stowage list he found plastic bags, a spare suit hose to connect a square scrubber to a round one, and a piece of cardboard (the cover of the flight plan) to stop the whole contraption collapsing as air ran through it. A sock came in handy, too. Everything was fixed to the square scrubber with an even grid of duct tape, applied by Swigert as, step by step, he followed the instructions read out to him by Mission Control. Another virtue of the stuff was that it stuck every bit as fast in space, in a vacuum, as it did at home. The whole thing worked; the astronauts came home safe, splashing down into the South Pacific in a smother of orange-and-white parachutes.Nixon called this a jerry-built operation. Mr Smylie had to agree. It was so straightforward that a college sophomore could have come up with it. But an engineer’s work at NASA in those days did often have a sophomore feel about it. President John F. Kennedy had told them, more or less, to put a man on the Moon, and they rushed to do it in the tightest time they could. He had rushed too, applying immediately for a job at NASA in Houston because Douglas Aircraft, for which he was working in California, had put in no bid for space-work. He longed to be a part of it all.The challenges were quite new, however, and the specifications unknown. He had a lot to do with spacesuits, for example. But what exactly were men going to do on the Moon? Were they merely going to look, and leave? Or were they going to walk about and pick things up? (In which case, they needed less bulky gloves.) How could the suits be cooled, and rid of condensation, and “burped” of excess oxygen bubbling into the water, if astronauts were going to spend several hours there? All these problems he laboured over and largely solved, earning patents for a few of them. Luckily, in the early days he could just build a prototype in his workshop, take it over to the technicians and get it approved at once. Things got much more drawn-out later.In all he spent decades at NASA, working on the Mercury, Gemini and Apollo programmes. He devised the first proper carbon-dioxide sensor for 24-hour missions and a heat-shield for the Space Station. When he left, he became an aerospace consultant for various corporations. His firmest advice, though, was never to take individual credit for what he had done. America’s space programme was an immense undertaking involving thousands. The rescue of Apollo 13 had taken 60 guys in the back room, all chipping in their ideas. He had organised them, true. But his real contribution was simply to spot, on a list, the word “tape”, and believe it could do anything. ■