Culture - How FDR shaped the doctrine of national security in America

The New Deal gave rise to the idea, a new book shows. FRANKLIN DELANO ROOSEVELT (fdr) was in Chicago in October 1937 to open a new bridge. It was a typical example of the infrastructure projects that were integral to the president’s New Deal, which had alleviated the Great Depression and given Americans a sense of economic security. Perhaps 1m people turned up to hear him speak and enjoy a parade. Roosevelt used the occasion to deliver what would become one of the most consequential foreign-policy speeches in history.In what became known as the “quarantine speech”, he warned his audience of a spreading “reign of terror”. Nazi Germany was rapidly rearming and imperial Japan was mercilessly attacking the civilian population of Shanghai. The world, he said, was now in “a state of international anarchy and instability from which there is no escape through mere isolation or neutrality”. FDR argued that belligerent states must be quarantined before they infected others with the virus of war.Roosevelt knew that it would take more than a speech to begin preparing Americans for the possibility of war. Since the early 19th century America had essentially enjoyed “free security”. The country’s geography and continental scale seemed to make it invulnerable; with its territorial integrity unchallenged, it could forgo the cost of maintaining a large army. Threats in Asia or Europe seemed distant. Congress was more interested in fighting battles over the New Deal than preparing for battles abroad.When Woodrow Wilson made the decision to take America into the first world war, some of the arguments he used were to be echoed by Roosevelt 20 years later. But there were subtle differences. Wilsonian idealism was about defeating militarism and forming a new world order based on self-determination and collective security that would protect America’s own democracy. However, his plan fell apart when realpolitik won out at Versailles and Congress failed to vote for America to join the nascent League of Nations (a precursor to the United Nations). The “Wilsonian moment” was just that—fleeting. Faced with a new global crisis, it fell to Roosevelt to learn from Wilson’s mistakes.Andrew Preston, a professor at Cambridge University, shows in fascinating detail how Roosevelt used similar language when talking about the social-protection policies and public-investment programmes of the New Deal and the emerging concept of national security. Both required centralised planning and the mobilisation of vast resources to address the peril confronting Americans.To be persuasive he had to exaggerate the dangers the country faced. In September 1940, more than a year before the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbour, he described a German invasion that would eradicate the American way of life: “The greatest attack that has ever been launched against freedom of the individual is nearer the Americas than ever before. To meet that attack we must prepare beforehand—for the simple reason that preparing later may and probably would be too late.”Roosevelt characterised the rearmament programme, followed by entry into the second world war in December 1941, as “total defence”. However, as Mr Preston notes, the search for complete security proved difficult to call off even after the war had finished. Roosevelt’s successor, Harry Truman, concluded nearly two months after Japan’s surrender that “Peace must be built upon [American] power…never again can we count on the luxury of time with which to arm ourselves.”Basic safety, others concluded, could be achieved only if international law was backed up by “a military position of offensive readiness…so formidable as to be beyond challenge”. This time, America had the political will and economic might to make it a reality. So it was that the American national-security state was born and with it the aim of containing the new threat to safety, the Soviet Union: an implacable ideological foe that would soon have the atomic bomb.Surprisingly, Mr Preston makes only passing reference to the existential dread nuclear weapons induced in ordinary Americans. The top-secret National Security Council report called “NSC-68” gets just one mention. Completed in 1950, it argued that the Soviet Union’s expansionist ambitions were a threat that could be countered only by another build-up of military might. It was in many ways the document that shaped the cold war.The author concludes with thoughts about what the second coming of Donald Trump might mean for a concept of national security that has lasted for more than 80 years. Since the book went to press, the answer has become clear. Mr Trump wishes to weaken the “administrative state” that was created by the New Deal, as well as its progeny, the national-security state. When bureaucrats resist, he sees a “deep-state” conspiracy. The wars he has chosen to fight are on “woke” and trade. FDR would not be impressed. ■For more on the latest books, films, TV shows, albums and controversies, sign up to Plot Twist, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter