By Invitation - For Trump, both action and inaction in Iran have consequences, says Karim Sadjadpour

The president’s strategy has been transformed by Israeli persistence and Iranian defiance. IRAN HAS an uncanny way of hijacking American presidencies. The 1979 Iranian revolution and subsequent hostage crisis ended Jimmy Carter’s presidency. The Iran-contra affair tainted Ronald Reagan’s presidency. Iranian machinations in post-war Iraq corroded George W. Bush’s presidency. The October 7th attacks on Israel by Hamas, a member of Iran’s axis of resistance, triggered a brutal war that subsumed Joe Biden’s presidency. Donald Trump may have envisioned a second term spent striking deals to resolve wars, but the Iran-Israel war could suck him in, too.The tragedy of this war is that Iran and Israel are unnatural enemies. In contrast to other modern conflicts—between Israel and Palestine, Russia and Ukraine, China and Taiwan—the two countries have no direct land or resources disputes. Nor do they harbour ancient animosities; Jews and Persians have an affinity that stretches back more than two millennia. Their national strengths are more complementary than competitive: Iran is big in energy, while Israel is a trailblazer in tech.Yet since its inception the Islamic Republic has chanted “Death to Israel” and spent decades seeking to eradicate the Jewish state. Now Israel seems to be pursuing the end of the Islamic Republic. Their two leaders—75-year-old Binyamin Netanyahu, Israel’s prime minister, and 86-year-old Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Iran’s supreme leader—are embroiled in a death-match which both men view as existential.Since Israel’s opening salvo in the early hours of June 13th it has launched hundreds of attacks on Iranian military and nuclear outposts, killed dozens of Iranian senior military commanders and nuclear scientists, and established aerial dominance over the skies of Tehran. Many Iranians initially applauded the precision attacks against their oppressors. But the continued bombardment of civilian areas has thus far bred fear, not political rebellion.Iran has responded by firing over 350 missiles at Israel—perhaps a third of its stockpile—killing dozens of Israeli civilians and injuring hundreds. Yet this is a war that Iran cannot win. Though it is 75 times Israel’s size, in virtually every respect—militarily, financially, technologically and diplomatically—it is outmatched.For Mr Netanyahu, whereas Israel’s war in Gaza has been internally divisive and internationally condemned, Israel’s war against Iran is internally unifying and internationally tolerated. Mr Netanyahu’s urgency to act stemmed from three motivations: Iran’s nuclear programme inching towards weaponisation, the need to strike before Iran rebuilt its air-defence systems that Israel destroyed last autumn, and, most importantly, the Israeli leader’s concern that Mr Trump might strike a deal limiting, but not eliminating, Iran’s nuclear capabilities.Despite Israel’s remarkable tactical victories, military invasions and revolutions are commonly judged by what they spawn, not what they destroy. In this context, the two biggest questions are what happens to the stability of the Iranian regime, and what happens to its subterranean nuclear-enrichment facility in Fordow, which is buried half a mile underground. This is where Mr Trump enters the picture.It is only America, with its stealth bombers equipped with 30,000-pound bunker-busting bombs, that has the capacity to destroy Fordow. Despite Mr Trump’s hopes for a diplomatic deal with Iran and his opposition to “stupid wars”, Israel’s early successes have compelled the American president to associate himself with the war, including issuing online threats to have Mr Khamenei killed and seek his unconditional surrender. Mr Trump now confronts what could be the most consequential decision of his presidency: whether to enter the war and bomb Fordow.Both action and inaction will have consequences. If the war concludes with both Fordow and the Islamic Republic intact, it would be logical for the regime to seek nuclear weapons. A revanchist Islamic Republic with nuclear weapons would be far more menacing to America, Israel and the wider Middle East than the current regime.If, on the other hand, America drops a 30,000-pound bomb on a nuclear facility, it may have profound and unforeseen consequences. These known unknowns could range from environmental contamination to Iran unleashing its weapons arsenal against Israel, regional oil infrastructure and global trade. Furthermore, the political fallout in Iran and the long-term impact on America’s global reputation could be felt for decades.While Mr Trump faces the most consequential choice of his presidency, Mr Khamenei finds himself in the most precarious position of all. The octogenarian’s physical and cognitive limitations undermine his ability to lead a high-tech military, intelligence and financial battle. Like Iraq’s Saddam Hussein two decades ago, he faces a dire choice: whatever he decides could be fatal for him and his regime. Agreeing to “surrender unconditionally”, as Mr Trump has urged, would bring devastating internal humiliation. Choosing to resist would lead to bombs on his nuclear sites—and, quite possibly, his bunker.Mr Trump entered office claiming that he could resolve the world’s thorniest diplomatic challenges—Ukraine, Gaza, Iran’s nuclear programme—in 24 hours. As recently as last month, in a speech in Riyadh, he ridiculed the Middle East policies of past American administrations, arguing that they “wrecked far more nations than they built”. But a combination of Mr Netanyahu’s persistence and Mr Khamenei’s defiance transformed Mr Trump’s Iran strategy in ways that may have a huge impact on his presidency, as well as on the Middle East for decades to come. ■Karim Sadjadpour is a senior fellow at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.