Letters - Reforming the NHS

Also this week, education in Vietnam, management crises, the decline of rhyme. Letters are welcome via e-mail to letters@economist.comFind out more about how we process your letterYour article on Britain’s National Health Service causally connected health-care litigation costs to the general woes that have accumulated over the past 15 years of cutbacks: long waiting lists, long emergency-department waits, and poor public satisfaction (“From envy of the world to national embarrassment”, May 31st). However, you didn’t appreciate the global nature of error in health care, highlighted by reports from the OECD in 2020 and 2022 that recognise that the costs that flow from litigation are not uniquely an NHS phenomenon, nor are they easily related to international differences in health-care funding or organisation. A failure to understand the complex causes of health-care mistakes is a barrier to learning how best to reduce the harm and the costs from that harm.The annual amount of £5.1bn ($6.8bn) spent on resolving harm in the NHS is too much when set against a yearly budget of £188.5bn, and we have long argued that adopting the safety-management systems of “high reliability organisations” (used, for example, by the aviation and railway industries) is a way forward. No country has error-free health care or can afford to be smug about having lower costs from health-care harm.John ReynardConsultant urological surgeonOxford University Hospitals NHS TrustAn all-out digital transformation of the NHS (“Intensive care”, May 31st) is yet another distraction from improving the efficiency of the service, especially of medical staff. IT initiatives have resulted in doctors undertaking the duties of secretaries, ward clerks and clinic co-ordinators, and added extra time to simple tasks such as requesting tests and writing prescriptions. This cognitive overload is a big reason for medical staff leaving the profession. In my own 40-year experience in the NHS, 30 as a consultant, I have witnessed a 50% reduction in the number of patients who can be seen in a clinic because of these ill-considered and time-consuming IT interventions.The focus of digitisation of the NHS has been to relieve the workload of the administrative staff. Until it relieves the workload of the medical staff, no progress will be made.Dr Richard MotleyCardiffI agree that an inflection point on Vietnam’s economy has been reached (“Dawn or dusk?”, May 24th). But industrial investors in Vietnam underline one issue. Land and basic labour are reasonably low-cost outside Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City, but mid-level managers such as accountants and operations managers are basically not available in these areas, nor do they command good salaries.For good reason, such talent cannot be induced to move to the countryside. So unless tertiary education is strengthened and more evenly distributed throughout the country, Vietnam’s ambition of becoming an industrial powerhouse will remain a dream.Dr Christian KoberVindelici AdvisorsShanghaiBartleby’s (May 31st) three principles when managers face a crisis of plan, decentralise and prioritise were firmly embedded a quarter of a century ago in the work of Karl Weick and Kathleen Sutcliffe, which emerged from their empirical research on a multitude of organisations, including defence forces, hospitals and first responders.They listed five principles (which some have expanded to seven): expect failure; be sensitive to what is happening—someone is paying attention—and do not wait for directions from headquarters; do not simplify and take nothing for granted; organise to expect challenge and change—help others and expect to be helped by others; and maintain a deference to expertise.These principles constantly stand the test of time, if only in retrospect, when failing organisations discover them afresh.J.M. InnesAdelaide, Australia“Feeling averse” (May 31st) charted the decline of rhyme in modern poetry. You focused mainly on printed modern poetry. True, if I had to read another poem by T.S. Eliot I would skip to the last line as well. But for much of recorded history, poetry was, and continues to be, recited or performed.The earliest extant rhymes from China were recorded in the Classic of Poetry, a collection of folk songs and court rhapsodies. The Chinese poetic tradition evolved beyond rhapsody and poetry to include lyrics and arias. Although poetry did not always require rhyming, metre and rhythm mattered. The Epic of Gilgamesh, Odyssey, Ramayana, Beowulf and Divine Comedy were not novels, but epic poems with complex metrical schemes. These poems were often recited and transmitted as part of an oral tradition.Poetry should be read aloud and heard, and experienced as part of a “lyric culture”. If understood in this more expansive sense, poetry is very much alive in genres ranging from country to rap, and from spoken word to opera. Granted, rhyming on the printed page is in decline. But poetry is more than roses and rhymes or line breaks and social media.Poetry exists in so far as we readers are capable of recognising and appreciating the poetic as such. We learn to appreciate irony and erudition or shade, but our capacity for the poetic could use more cultivation. Without poetry, life would be prosaic. (As I am currently on sabbatical, further questions should be directed to professors in the Tortured Poets Department.)Christopher TongAssociate professorUniversity of MarylandBaltimoreThank you for the brilliant piece on modern poetry. Your cheeky irreverence tackled a literary pet peeve of mine. Poetry can be summarised as follows: words with neither rhyme nor reason, complaints about them should be legion, an excuse for bad prose, invariably morose, they’re practically literary treason.Vijetha HuffmanArlington, VirginiaLambic pentameter was fine for Shakespeare, but Ogden Nash also deserves mention for this “limick”: Two nudists of Dover,Being purple all over,Were munched by a cowWhen mistaken for clover.Tom HoneArlington, VirginiaThe result from asking ChatGPT to write a poem is not just bad but also filled with rhymes, which seem to be the chatbot’s sole criterion for defining poetry. Given rhyme’s disappearance from contemporary English poems, it’s amusing how the “technology of the 21st century” clings to such an unfashionable literary device. As ChatGPT puts it: “Though modern verse may shift with time, I simply cannot quit the rhyme.”James Hill-JiangNew YorkBefore I read I thought I knewthat Slough does sound like though or through.I did learn and do know nowthat Brits pronounce the name as Slough.Richard StumpfRockville, Maryland