The world this week - Business

Oil prices jumped in reaction to the war between Israel and Iran, with Brent crude rising to $77 a barrel, its highest price since early February. Prices tapered off after the International Energy Agency said that global production is expected to outstrip demand this year, which will cause oil inventories to increase. Markets were also jittery about disruption to shipping in the Strait of Hormuz. The jamming of ship transponders caused two oil tankers to collide near the strait. Around 1,000 vessels in the area experienced interference with their global-positioning systems from June 12th to 15th, according to Windward, a shipping-technology firm. Persistent GPS jamming is a rising maritime threat, it said.The state-owned Abu Dhabi National Oil Company, better known as ADNOC, led a consortium offering $19bn to take over Santos, an energy exploration company in Australia and a large supplier of natural gas in that country. Santos’s board said it was inclined to accept the bid, which if completed will be the biggest-ever takeover of an Australian company.The Federal Reserve maintained its benchmark interest rate at a range of 4.25% to 4.5%. The Fed lowered its estimate of growth in the American economy this year, to 1.4%, and raised its forecast for unemployment. Its “dot plot” still suggests there will be two more rate cuts this year.Responding to a spike in the yields on long-dated Japanese government debt, the Bank of Japan decided to slow the pace of reductions in its bond-purchase programme. This would “allow yields to move more freely under market forces”, explained the bank’s governor, Ueda Kazuo. The central bank left its key interest rate on hold at 0.5%.The Bank of England also kept its main interest rate unchanged, at 4.25%. Figures released a day before the bank’s decision showed Britain’s annual rate of inflation remained stubbornly high in May, at 3.4%. Donald Trump approved Nippon Steel’s takeover of US Steel, closing a deal that had faced uncertainty ever since it was first announced in December 2023. Joe Biden had blocked the acquisition in the last days of his presidency citing national-security concerns, and Mr Trump also initially opposed it. Mr Trump’s order says that those risks will be “adequately mitigated” in the agreement, which gives the American government a “golden share” in US Steel that allows it to veto unfavourable decisions, such as transferring jobs outside America. US Steel will keep its headquarters in Pittsburgh.The Paris Air Show, the biggest such event in the aviation industry, took place against the backdrop of the Air India crash. Rafael, an Israeli defence company, said it would sue the French government, after its booth at the show along with those of other Israeli defence firms were walled off for displaying what the government described as “offensive” weaponry. Rafael’s systems form part of Israel’s Iron Dome missile shield.Kering, a French luxury-goods company that includes the Gucci, Saint Laurent and McQueen brands in its assets, appointed Luca de Meo to be its new chief executive in the hope of turning round its struggling business. Mr de Meo currently runs Renault. The French carmaker’s share price plunged after the announcement of his departure, which comes amid uncertainty in the car industry over the effects of tariffs. At Kering Mr de Meo will replace François-Henri Pinault as CEO. A member of the controlling family, Mr Pinault had held the job for 20 years.Meta took a 49% stake in Scale AI, a startup that specialises in data annotation for artificial intelligence, labelling and tagging data to improve the accuracy of AI. Alexandr Wang, Scale’s founder, will join Meta to help develop its AI efforts. In its race to secure a dominant position in AI, Meta is also offering $100m to top staff at OpenAI to switch companies, according to Sam Altman, OpenAI’s boss. None of his “best people” had taken the offer, said Mr Altman.The Pentagon gave a $200m contract to OpenAI to “develop prototype frontier AI capabilities to address critical national-security challenges in both warfighting and enterprise domains”. At the same time OpenAI launched an initiative to provide its services to America’s federal, state and local governments under one umbrella, which includes customising its models for national security.Andy Jassy, Amazon’s chief executive, wrote a memo to his employees expounding its advances in AI, but also warning staff that some of their jobs would be at risk during the next few years as the technology is rolled out across the company. As Amazon builds ever more AI agents “We’ll be able to focus less on rote work and more on thinking strategically,” he said, comparing agents to “teammates”. He urged his workers to “use and experiment with AI whenever you can”.