The Americas - Police allege that Jair Bolsonaro sanctioned a spy ring

The right-wing former president is already on trial for allegedly plotting a coup. Jair Bolsonaro, Brazil’s far-right former president, is on trial for allegedly plotting a coup to stay in power after he lost an election in 2022. But the allegations do not end there. Police now say he approved the operation of an illegal spy ring to target his enemies.On June 17th the federal police handed their inquiry to the attorney general. He will decide whether there is enough evidence for the accused to be tried. The police list numerous current and former officials who allegedly ran the surveillance network. They did not recommend indicting Mr Bolsonaro because he is already answering for related crimes as part of the coup trial. His son, Carlos, a councillor in Rio de Janeiro, and Alexandre Ramagem, Mr Bolsonaro’s former bodyguard, whom he appointed to lead the intelligence services in 2019, stand accused of masterminding the operations. Carlos says the investigations are politically motivated and Mr Ramagem says the police have created a “narrative”.Police say the surveillance began after Mr Bolsonaro took office in 2019. Mr Ramagem allegedly ordered the use of geolocation software to track those critical of Mr Bolsonaro, as well as police officers who were investigating corruption. Police say the goal was to use the information on people’s whereabouts to smear Mr Bolsonaro’s opponents.Mr Bolsonaro is already barred from next year’s presidential election. If found guilty for his role in a coup plot, he is expected to be sentenced to jail. But he is still Brazil’s most popular right-wing politician. He has no obvious successor. Another of his sons, Eduardo, a congressman, talks of running. A third son suggests that Mr Bolsonaro’s successor must pledge to pardon him. ■Sign up to El Boletín, our subscriber-only newsletter on Latin America, to understand the forces shaping a fascinating and complex region.