Asia - India’s and China’s civil-service exams are notoriously difficult

They impose big costs on both societies. Cigarette butts, spectacle lenses and car tyres. Which of those items contain plastic? Papaya, pineapple, guava. How many of those fruits were brought to India by the Portuguese? Last month around half a million Indians sat down to answer such questions, which were eclectic, but high-stakes. They were part of the exam to join India’s civil service.For those who passed by correctly answering questions like those above (all three items contain plastic, and all three fruits were brought over by the Portuguese), it is merely the first and easiest step in a long and arduous process. Up next are nine more papers to be taken over 27 hours from August onwards, covering a range of subjects and even more obscure questions. Last year candidates were asked to write 1,000 words on statements such as: “The empires of the future will be the empires of the mind.” Those who do that successfully are then invited to a final interview.India’s selection process is so gruelling because a role in the civil service is highly coveted. Even as India’s private sector has grown, government jobs remain a ticket to prosperity, prestige and better marriage prospects. Last year 1.1m people applied to join the top tier of the civil service, but around 1,000 (0.2% of those who actually sat the first exam) were offered a spot.That makes India’s exams even more competitive than those in China, where, amid a slowing economy, a growing number of people are turning to the public sector. Last year a record 3.4m Chinese registered and passed the initial screening for the national civil-service exam—well over twice the number who did so in 2014. Just over 39,700 (1.5% of those who sat the exam) secured a job.In both countries the exams are considered the fairest way to filter candidates. But despite the exams’ meritocratic intentions, critics in both countries believe they filter candidates according to the wrong criteria. By screening for rote learning and test-taking, they neglect to assess actual public-policy skills such as management, teamwork and communication. In China the process increasingly also features questions to test familiarity with Xi Jinping Thought, the ideology of the leader.All this contributes to the middling performance of both bureaucracies. On a measure of government effectiveness calculated by the World Bank, China and India rank in the 74th and 68th percentiles globally. Nor do the exams help eliminate corruption, another common scourge. On June 9th, in the latest high-profile example of bureaucratic graft, a young Indian civil servant in the eastern state of Odisha was accused of accepting a bribe of 1m rupees ($11,683) from a businessman. (He has been suspended, but denies wrongdoing.)In both countries efforts are being made to recruit people in other ways. China is experimenting with hiring some candidates for fixed terms according to their experience, rather than their exam performance. Similarly, India has introduced a “lateral-entry” scheme to allow private-sector specialists to join the public workforce. But these remain nascent initiatives. Exams are still the backbone of public-sector recruitment.If the merits of this selection process are debatable, the costs—both human and economic—are more visible. Success in both exams requires immense toil. Many of those examined do not work in the years leading up to the test; those holding down jobs end up studying early in the morning or late at night. Thousands seek the help of coaching centres; the best schools offer full-time training and board.Shikha Singh moved from a small town in central India to Delhi just to prepare for the exam, surrounded by fellow aspirants. Ahead of her recent fourth try, Ms Singh put in ten-hour days, but she worries that this might still not be enough to cover the wide variety of subjects. In south-eastern China, a prospective civil servant (who preferred not to be named) from Jiangxi province has put in similar shifts since quitting her job in 2023 and moving back in with her parents. The cycle of application and rejection has an effect on morale: exam failure sometimes can push candidates to suicide in both countries. Ms Singh feels she has lost social status because of her failed attempts. Her counterpart in China is also weighed down by anxiety. “Only a few people pass the exam,” she says. “I wonder what those who fail do.”It is a good question. Years of youth spent in study, instead of work, are an economic loss. The exams force college graduates to delay employment, reducing their long-term consumption. And the subjects so feverishly swotted up on late at night are not necessarily of use once the exams are over. Knowing the history of fruits or the details of Xi Jinping Thought might help candidates earn a civil-service job and all the perks it brings—but perhaps not a place in the private sector. ■Stay on top of our India coverage by signing up to Essential India, our free weekly newsletter.