Asia - Can South Korea’s new president get his country back on track?

From culture to chips to arms, South Korea should punch above its weight. UNTIL RECENTLY South Korea seemed to be moving inexorably up the global food chain. Gone are the days of a “shrimp among whales”, as a traditional proverb described the nation’s position beside larger neighbours. Today’s South Korea is relatively free, relatively rich and relatively large, part of a small club of democratic nations with a GDP per person over $30,000 and a population over 50m (see chart). As Lee Jae-myung, the newly elected president of South Korea, quipped in an interview with The Economist earlier this year, now it is more fitting to compare his country to a dolphin.But that progress was thrown into question last December when Yoon Suk Yeol, then South Korea’s president, briefly imposed martial law. Although he was ultimately impeached, the episode raised troubling questions about the health of the country’s democracy, the stability of its economy and the trajectory of its foreign policy. “Our national prestige has fallen,” Mr Lee lamented during the campaign to replace Mr Yoon. South Korean society remains intensely polarised. Other problems loom. The Bank of Korea recently cut this year’s GDP-growth forecast by half, to just 0.8%. Donald Trump’s tariffs threaten South Korea’s economy; in the past he has also cast doubt on America’s security commitments to South Korea and has appeared to placate North Korea’s dictator. Can Mr Lee sort out his country?Three industries underpin South Korea’s global clout: culture, technology and arms. Start with culture, perhaps the best known export. At a k-pop concert, such as the appearance by Seventeen at Gocheok stadium in Seoul last year, the crowd resembles a mock United Nations, with fans from as far afield as Toronto, Paris and Manila. As Juraimi Jaril, a fan from Singapore, puts it, “K-pop really put Korea on the map.” Last year K-pop groups accounted for four of the ten most commercially successful albums in the world, according to IFPI, an international recording-industry body—and this was a year when the genre’s biggest stars, BTS, were taking a break from music to perform mandatory military service.Attention has also spread to other forms of culture. “These days we’re eating kimchi instead of cauliflower!” King Willem-Alexander of the Netherlands gushed during a reception in South Korea’s honour in 2023, noting the spread of k-drama, k-movies, k-beauty and even k-food. In November Han Kang, a novelist, became the first woman from Asia to win the Nobel Prize in Literature. Membership in fan communities connected to hallyu (“Korean wave” culture) has grown from under 10m in 2012 to 225m in 2023; while acolytes are primarily concentrated in Asia, groups of over 1m exist in countries as disparate as Italy, Chile and Jordan.K-fans’ spirits remained undimmed in the face of political turmoil. South Korea welcomed more than 3.5m foreign tourists between December and February, around 20% more than in the same period of 2023-24. Mr Lee has pledged more state support for the creation and distribution of k-content, through export financing and tax breaks. “Culture is the economy, and culture is international competitiveness,” he declared enthusiastically in his inauguration speech.A taste for all things Korean has helped whet an appetite for Korean goods and gadgets, too. “It opens customers’ eyes—once you see the dramas you get into the other parts,” says Ryu Jin Roy, chairman of the Federation of Korean Industries, a lobby group for big business. South Korean firms are among the global leaders in consumer goods, from smartphones to cars.But South Korea’s most strategic products are the least visible. Samsung and SK Hynix, two South Korean electronics behemoths, dominate the market for mainstream memory chips, the commodity of the semiconductor world. The firms have also pioneered a new type of high-bandwidth memory (HBM) technology that is an essential element in chips for generative artificial intelligence (AI), enabling higher performance at smaller sizes and lower power consumption. “HBM is a technology miracle,” Jensen Huang, the chief executive of Nvidia, the AI chip darling, said last year. While trailing Taiwanese firms, South Korea’s champions also produce high-end logic chips. Mr Lee has pledged to assemble a 100trn won ($73bn) public-private fund to continue developing South Korea’s AI and semiconductor infrastructure.K-defence may be South Korea’s next hit industry. Following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in February 2022, South Korea was an exception to the global shortage of munitions. Because of the need to respond to continuing threats from North Korea, “our capacity is still quite high and we are able to surge production,” says Mr Ryu, who also heads Poongsan Group, a big South Korean metals and munitions maker. South Korean arms exports averaged $13bn annually between 2022 and 2024, up from an average of $3bn between 2011 and 2021, putting it among the world’s top ten arms exporters. America hopes to tap South Korean shipbuilders to help revive its dilapidated shipbuilding industry.South Koreans across the political spectrum share pride in this move up the geopolitical food chain. Yet, as it has grown, South Korea’s surrounding habitat has become ever harsher, leaving little room for manoeuvre, even for the swiftest dolphin. Mr Lee has pledged to pursue a “pragmatic” foreign policy. His aim is to strengthen his country’s alliance with America and reinforce a budding rapprochement with Japan, while repairing relations with China and reopening dialogue with North Korea.Mr Lee’s first weeks in office reveal his priorities. His first call went to the White House. Mr Trump and Mr Lee pledged to work towards an agreement on tariffs and trade, and to play a round of golf together. Second was Japan’s prime minister, Ishiba Shigeru, who said he wished to move bilateral relations forward. Then came Xi Jin-ping, China’s leader, whom Mr Lee formally invited to an Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation leaders meeting in South Korea this autumn; if Mr Xi comes, it would be his first visit to the country since 2014. Mr Lee also turned off loudspeakers blasting propaganda into North Korea.Pulling off the balancing act will be difficult. Mr Trump’s administration is pushing Asian partners to choose sides between America and China more definitively. Last month at the Shangri-La Dialogue, an annual meeting of defence bigwigs in Singapore, Pete Hegseth, America’s defence secretary, warned against “seeking both economic co-operation with China and defence co-operation with the United States”. Steve Bannon, Mr Trump’s former campaign chief and MAGA ideologue, put it far more bluntly to Chosun, a South Korean newspaper. Talk of a pragmatic balance between the superpowers is “full of shit,” he said. “If South Korea believes in freedom and democracy, it cannot claim neutrality between the US and China.”In the long term, the greatest threats to South Korea’s continued flourishing are domestic. Demographic change is sapping South Korea’s growth prospects; no president has managed to make a meaningful dent in the problem. Last year the total fertility rate rose, slightly, for the first time in nearly a decade—but it remained the lowest in the world, at just 0.75. The population is projected to shrink to 47m by 2050, and to 37m by 2070.The economy grew an average of 6.4% per year between 1970 and 2022, but the Bank of Korea reckons that even with improvements to productivity, growth will slow to an annual average rate of 2.4% in the 2020s, 0.9% in the 2030s, and 0.2% in the 2040s. A business-as-usual approach means that “K-power will not only peak, but begin to decline rapidly,” writes Lee Chung-min of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, an American think-tank.The next phase of South Korea’s history, in short, is not about whether it can become a whale, but whether it can continue to thrive as a dolphin. ■