Asia - Why India has so many snakebites

And what to do about it. FARAH KHATRI is lucky to be alive. The stars had to align for her to survive after being bitten by a saw-scaled viper while planting trees in north Mumbai. She was in a major city with many public hospitals. One of her companions had a car to drive her there immediately. Along the gridlocked route an ambulance from that very hospital appeared out of nowhere, allowing the car to follow in its slipstream. Her luck almost ran out because the hospital lacked a ventilator—crucial in snakebite treatment—but an ambulance driver raced to get her 24km to the nearest facility with both antivenom and ventilators. “I believe it’s a miracle,” says Ms Khatri.Globally snakebite is a neglected ailment, despite an estimated annual global toll of 138,000 deaths and 400,000 permanent disabilities, such as amputation. Some 5.4m people worldwide suffer bites every year, a third to half of which are venomous. India is the worst affected. Though official figures put the number of annual deaths at around 2,000, “there is a huge gap between…direct surveys and official data”, notes the health ministry. Estimates suggest that a third of all snakebites and about 40% of deaths occur in India.The problem is at its worst in the monsoon, which started this month and runs until September, when the rain washes snakes out of their holes. They are attracted to rats, which are attracted to grain (common in fields and rural homes) and rubbish (common in urban areas). Bites occur when humans live in close proximity to either of those two things, which in a crowded, dirty and largely rural country is often. The country’s most dangerous snakes are the “big four”: the cobra, common krait, Russell’s viper, and the saw-scaled viper like the one that bit Ms Khatri. They account for 90% of venomous bites.Snakebite is neglected for two reasons. First, it kills fewer people than other tropical diseases. Second, it affects the poorest people in the poorest parts of poor countries. “If it was dengue or HIV or some other thing that was more sexy, it would have gotten buy-in much earlier,” says Yogesh Jain, a doctor in central India who is also a member of a new global task-force to tackle the problem.Snakebites kill or injure more people than they need to. That is, in part, because poor people in remote areas often resort to traditional medicine or quacks, either because they are more readily accessible or because out-of-pocket costs are lower. Moreover, the treatment for snakebites has barely evolved since it was invented in the 19th century. Researchers are studying ways to make antivenom more effective, as well as antibody-based drugs.Yet better antivenoms and drugs are not the whole answer. Because antivenoms are species-specific—and sometimes specific to different regions—their production does not benefit from economies of scale, making them pricey. Antimalarials cost as little as $1 a day, but antivenoms can cost between $12 and $300 per vial, according to David Lalloo of the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine. But a bigger issue is that rural health systems are weak and even India’s largest and best-funded cities are inadequately equipped to deal with snakebites. Better or cheaper medicines are of little use if they do not reach the people who need them.More extreme weather, especially flooding, is likely to cause more snake encounters. The Indian government is taking the problem seriously. Last year it published a national action plan to deal with snakebites. The first item on its list of initiatives is to collect robust data. The central government has asked all states to make snakebite a “notifiable disease”, or one that must be reported to authorities. That puts it on par with plague and cholera. Better reporting allows stretched agencies to devote funding to the most badly affected regions. The government also plans to ensure that there is antivenom at all health facilities.Such measures should help, even in the absence of overall improvements in health systems. In the meantime, many small steps could help prevent bites from happening at all. Better sanitation, storing grain away from homes or tweaking the timing of farmers’ fieldwork to avoid coinciding with peak snake activity would all help. So would providing cots for villagers to sleep on, raising them off the floor where snakes do their slithering. Another simple intervention is shoes. “If you get the entire rural population of the world footwear you could reduce snakebite by about 90%,” says Dr Lalloo. “But currently almost nowhere are those kinds of packages being put in place.” ■Stay on top of our India coverage by signing up to Essential India, our free weekly newsletter.