The Americas - Brazilians love football. Their national team is past its prime

Brazil hasn’t won a World Cup in a quarter of a century. Corruption and chaotic domestic leagues are to blame. On June 10th Brazil’s national football team won a match. Unremarkable, you might think, for the most successful team to play the game. Yet the mood afterwards in Brazil was unfamiliar: sour relief. In beating Paraguay, a football pipsqueak, the team had managed just one goal. The victory did qualify Brazil for the 2026 World Cup, but only three months after arch-rival Argentina had already become a mathematical certainty to do the same. Brazil’s team is set to qualify third in its group behind puny Ecuador, having suffered a humiliating thrashing by Argentina in a qualification match in March.This decline is not recent. The Seleção, or national squad, has not won a World Cup in more than 20 years, having done so a record five times in the five decades to 2002. More than anywhere else, national identity in Brazil is tied to football. Every schoolchild can rattle off the names of Pelé, Garrincha, Ronaldinho, Tostão, and Ronaldo the Phenomenon. The International Centre for Sports Studies, a research centre in Switzerland, reckons Brazil exported 3,020 professional footballers between 2020 and 2025, more than anywhere else. But on this measure, too, Brazil is slowing. France and Argentina are closing in as factories for fabulous footballers.“This is the worst moment for the national team,” says André Rizek, a sports commentator. Brazilians are turning against their team. In recent years many have stopped wearing the yellow jersey, which has become associated with far-right politics. The Brazilian Football Confederation (CBF) is desperate. In May it hired Carlo Ancelotti, an Italian superstar coach, to try to turn things around.The Seleção’s decline is partly down to chance, a reversion to the mean. Two generations of superstar footballers have retired and although the new crop is “excellent”, says a retired football star, they are “not of the same calibre”. It doesn’t help the mood that top players today are sold to European clubs as teenagers, and so rarely play at home. “Brazilians feel they have nothing to do with the national team any more; it has become more and more distant,” says Juca Kfouri, a leading Brazilian football journalist. The country’s most famous current footballer, Neymar, is a wonderful dribbler. But he is divisive, a vocal supporter of Jair Bolsonaro, a far-right former president, and has a reputation as a party-going playboy. He is also 33, and has been dogged by injuries recently—mainly in Saudi Arabia. “He owes us,” says Carlos Alberto, an angry fan in Rio de Janeiro. “He seems to have forgotten his job!”Beyond the declining quality of its players, the fading star of the Seleção can be traced back to the rot among Brazil’s football federations and the enmity of its clubs. In the early 2010s, a series of investigations uncovered massive graft at the heart of FIFA, football’s governing body based in Switzerland. Prosecutors found that bribery had greased virtually all of FIFA’s dealings, ranging from clothing-sponsorship contracts to the selection process for World Cup host countries and the body’s presidential elections. The investigations led to the ouster of Ricardo Teixeira, the long-time head of the CBF.After that, the CBF went into a tailspin. Two of Mr Teixeira’s successors were caught in it, one sentenced to jail, the other banned from football for 20 years. Another was removed after being accused of sexual harassment. All three maintain their innocence. A fourth, Ednaldo Rodrigues, was booted out by the courts on May 15th after a short tenure, his contract declared null because a signature may have been forged. “The CBF has always had lots of allegations of corruption,” says Mr Rizek. “But you used to have more professional people in charge. Now it’s chaotic.” Under Mr Rodrigues the national team’s coach changed four times in two years.Questions about money persist. According to Allan de Abreu, a journalist with Piauí, a magazine, Mr Rodrigues got the CBF to pay for flights for the 1,200km (750-mile) journey from Salvador, his home city, to Rio, where the federation is based, for his wife, daughter, grandson, nephew and even the family hairdresser. Mr Abreu also found that to keep the leaders of Brazil’s 27 state-level football federations happy, he had to raise their salaries from 50,000 reais a month ($9,000) to 215,000. During the 2022 World Cup he flew 49 people unrelated to football, including several congressmen and their families, to Qatar and put them up in five-star hotels. Meanwhile, money to train referees ran out. Mr Rodrigues says all CBF accounts were audited. “I have never benefited from a single cent from the CBF other than my salary,” he says.Problems are compounded by the sub-national federations. Brazil has a morass of leagues, with the national one existing alongside leagues from Brazil’s 27 states, often with multiple tiers. The CBF organises them all, as well as the national team’s matches. But power in the CBF is skewed: each vote by a state federation chief counts for three points, whereas the votes of Brazil’s first-division clubs are worth only two points, and those of second-division teams’ are worth only one.The system was cooked up to protect piffling federations, which control weak teams, from losing investment and relevance. This means the country’s top clubs, most of them based in São Paulo and Rio, “have to waste a lot of time playing against tiny teams that do not matter”, explains Mr Kfouri. The resulting fixtures calendar is mad. At the start of the season Brazil’s top clubs play a match every three days, compared with every five days for Real Madrid and six for Liverpool. Players are often exhausted and under-trained.Change may be forced on the CBF by the growing clout of the big clubs. In recent years Brazil has legalised sports betting and allowed clubs to incorporate as public limited companies (most had previously been run as non-profit associations). Money is pouring into the top teams, which are becoming more professional. “The CBF is anachronistic and in my view its days are numbered,” warns Orlando Silva, a former sports minister.In May, after Mr Rodrigues’s fall, dozens of clubs wrote an open letter to the CBF. They demanded changes to the weighting of votes in CBF elections, and called for clubs to be given a say over the match calendar. They also wanted financial fair-play rules to be adopted to prevent clubs spending more than they earn. On June 9th the CBF’s new president set up a commission to carry out the latter change. Yet the clubs are divided. Eight major teams refused to sign the letter. “They always see each other as enemies,” says Mr Rizek. “They don’t have a business vision.”This is what Mr Ancelotti, Real Madrid’s ex-manager, is up against. The CBF enticed him with a salary of €10m and a €5m bonus if Brazil wins the World Cup, making him the highest-paid coach of a national team. At his swearing-in in May, he praised the Brazilian players he grew up admiring in the 1980s and spoke of the importance of talent and sacrifice. He has all the ingredients to work his magic—if only the CBF can keep out of his way. ■Sign up to El Boletín, our subscriber-only newsletter on Latin America, to understand the forces shaping a fascinating and complex region.