China - Chinese consumers are splurging—but probably not for long

There is a reason retail sales have boomed. IN THE West the shopping calendar is organised around the birthday of Jesus Christ. In China it is shaped by the birthday of JD.com. That giant e-commerce firm, established on June 18th 1998, introduced the “618” shopping festival in honour of its founding. The festival offers discounts and other enticements to shoppers in the run-up to the big day. But just as Christmas decorations seem to appear earlier each year, the 618 festival keeps starting sooner. This year’s promotion began on May 13th, a week earlier than in 2024.The early start helped boost last month’s retail sales, which grew by 6.4% year on year, faster than expected (see chart). The festival had stimulated “enthusiasm” among consumers, said China’s government, which has promised to boost consumption “vigorously” this year. It hopes higher household spending will defeat deflation and cut the economy’s reliance on investment spending (which is often wasteful) and foreign demand (which is threatened by tariffs).The month’s sales were also lifted by the government’s own attempt to reshape the country’s shopping schedules. Since early 2024 it has provided a steadily expanding subsidy to consumers who trade in old goods for newer, greener and snazzier versions. A variant on the “cash-for-clunkers” schemes popular after the global financial crisis of 2007-09, the programme now extends far beyond cars. According to government figures, it has subsidised the purchase of more than 77m household appliances, from refrigerators to air purifiers, in the first five months of this year. It has also financed discounts on more than 57m pieces of home decor, bathware or kitchenware, 6.5m electric bikes, and over 56m electronic goods, such as mobile phones.In recent weeks the scheme has dovetailed with 618, allowing vendors to offer festival discounts, courtesy of the taxpayer. Some provincial governments now worry that they will run out of money for the programme long before its scheduled conclusion at the end of this year. The region of Xinjiang in the far west of China suspended its scheme on June 15th, saying that funds were almost exhausted. Chongqing, home to 32m people, has also run out of the money earmarked for home appliances. Several other provinces have imposed daily quotas on their subsidies. They are waiting for the central government, which provides roughly 90% of the money, to disburse the remaining funds: 138bn yuan ($19bn) out of the scheme’s 300bn-yuan budget. It will do so in an “orderly manner”, according to the Securities Times, an official newspaper.Some provinces are taking advantage of the pause to tighten up their rules. An earlier version of the scheme last year was vulnerable to abuse. Some firms have captured the subsidy for themselves by raising their prices before applying the government discount. Others have claimed to sell the same item dozens of times. Firms must now match any subsidy to the unique serial number of a product. In some provinces couriers must provide a photo of an unwrapped, activated product at the consumer’s home to prove it has been sold.Beyond these speed-bumps lies the bigger question of what happens when the government’s trade-in festival comes to an end. Many companies fear the schemes have merely front-loaded spending rather than substantially increased it. Strong retail sales now may be followed by unusually weak sales next year. If the property market has not stabilised by then, or if the trade war is still raging, the economy could be in real trouble. Even the big appliance-makers have doubts. Although they are taking advantage of the scheme, “deep down in their mind, they think this may create a lot of problems at a later stage,” says Chen Luo of Bank of America.Festivals such as 618 have created similar problems in the past. During the pandemic, consumers took advantage of the deep discounts that were available on cosmetics to stock up with long-lasting beauty products, says Mr Luo. But that depressed sales for a while after, as people worked through their strategic lipstick reserves. To keep the recent momentum going, China’s government may find that it needs to offer more cash next year for a diminishing supply of clunkers. Just as the 618 festival keeps starting sooner, and Christmas lights keep twinkling earlier, China’s flagship stimulus scheme may keep getting longer. ■Subscribers can sign up to Drum Tower, our new weekly newsletter, to understand what the world makes of China—and what China makes of the world.