Asia - Could Trump can AUKUS?

Australia is waiting nervously for the president’s decision. Could Donald Trump soon upend America’s alliance with Australia? Allies in the Pacific have mostly avoided the pressure directed by Mr Trump at America’s friends across the Atlantic. That now seems set to change. Mr Trump’s administration is demanding sharp increases in annual defence spending from Australia, from nearly 2% to 3.5% of GDP, and could soon insist on new commitments to fight alongside America.If Australia cannot make those promises, Mr Trump could gut part of the alliance: a submarine-building pact between America, Australia and Britain known as AUKUS. No such threat has yet been made, officials stress. But a review of the deal by the Pentagon has defence wonks in all three countries concerned.The AUKUS agreement, signed in 2021, would let Australia put nuclear-powered submarines to sea by the mid-2030s. In doing so, it would join an exclusive club of nations operating nuclear-powered vessels, which can range over longer distances than their diesel-powered counterparts. To help it get boats in the water faster, America would sell three to five Virginia-class attack submarines to Australia in the middle of the next decade. Then Australia would build its own submarines to a new British design in the 2040s.When asked about the review, Australian officials project calm. Richard Marles, the deputy prime minister and defence minister, shrugs it off as a “natural” decision by a new administration. He points out that his government undertook its own review of AUKUS when it came to office in 2022, and Sir Keir Starmer’s Labour government in Britain did the same last year. Beneath the placid surface, however, currents of anxiety are coursing through the defence establishment.Leading the review is the Pentagon’s policy chief, Elbridge Colby. That alone has made some of its supporters nervous. Last year, while out of government, Mr Colby sharply criticised the sale of the Virginia class submarines. It would give away the “crown jewels” in America’s arsenal, he said. Moreover, it would do so at a critical time, in a window in the mid-2030s when some analysts anticipate that China might be most likely to attempt to invade Taiwan. If Australia cannot commit to using its submarines to support American forces in defending the self-governing island, then selling them to Australia will only weaken deterrence, he said at the time.Mr Colby has softened his approach since then. The real problem, he says, is that the American submarine industry has fallen far behind its production targets, making only 1.2 boats a year. If it could pick up the pace, to say 2.3 boats a year, then America might be made no worse off following the sale. America “should do everything we can to make this work”, Mr Colby told lawmakers during his confirmation hearing in March.As part of the deal, Australia is injecting $3bn into America’s submarine industry. The deal has strong backing from Congress, particularly in districts which would benefit from more funding for shipbuilding. But throwing money at the problem might not solve it. “The real risk is that the shipbuilders don’t use the money well,” says Brent Sadler of the Heritage Foundation, a think-tank in Washington that is close to the Trump administration.There are other aspects of the agreement that make sense for America. From 2027 Australia will begin hosting and maintaining American and British nuclear-powered submarines at a base near Perth, a city on Australia’s west coast. That would put them beyond the range of most Chinese missiles—unlike American submarine bases in Guam and Japan. This is a big part of the deal’s attractiveness to senior military officials. Another component of the pact focuses on defence technology co-operation in areas such as artificial intelligence. That is relatively uncontroversial, and appeals to the Silicon Valley types within the Trump administration.Anthony Albanese, Australia’s prime minister, was prepared to explain all of this to Mr Trump at the G7 summit in Canada on June 17th. It would have been their first meeting since the president’s re-election. But Mr Trump left Canada a day early, citing the war between Israel and Iran. Mr Albanese has played it cool since then, not hurrying to Washington like other allied leaders to press his case. It seems likely to be months before Mr Albanese will have another chance. Until then, AUKUS will hang in the balance. Australian officials will just have to wait nervously. ■