Europe - Ukraine looks abroad to boost its manpower 

Both sides are actively recruiting soldiers from overseas. THE NEWEST recruits will leave at dawn to join Ukrainian brigades on the southern front. Some of them are excited. Others, deadly focused. “Infante”, a 38-year old veteran from near Bogotá, Colombia, does not say much at all. The whites of his eyes, which flicker as they scour the room for threats, speak their own language. J-C, a 60-year-old training co-ordinator from Brazil, looks on approvingly. He has seen it all—from East Timor to Bakhmut, for which he proudly wears a medal. “Few words,” he says. “But these are the guys who survive.”Three and a half years into the war, Ukraine is pivoting to international recruitment to tackle its manpower crisis. The call first went out in February 2022, when President Volodymyr Zelensky appealed for help after Russia launched its full-scale invasion. But that initial international legion was badly managed: the overwhelming majority eventually left because of the chaos and harsh conditions. Now Ukraine needs to do better. In May a new recruitment centre opened at an undisclosed location in western Ukraine. A digital advertising campaign was launched, concentrating initially on Latin America.The push is promising, with a hundred-odd new applications a day. Recruits generally pay their own way to Ukraine, and do not get preferential treatment over Ukrainian soldiers. But the front-line salaries of $3,000 a month before bonuses, perhaps ten times the average in poorer parts of South America, are a strong incentive. For some, fighting for freedom is enough.  According to Lieutenant Oleksiy Bezhevets, a defence-ministry official overseeing the programme, Ukraine hopes to recruit “several thousands” more a month from abroad. That would be welcome. Ukraine’s recruitment rate is running at 27,000 a month, roughly 15,000 below Russia’s. And that does not take into account a worrying number of desertions during training.Recruiting from the global south can be complicated. Russian influence is increasing widely there, so Ukraine has to tread warily. Visa issues complicate transit through Europe. The challenges do not end on arrival. Adapting to new conditions is tough: an unfamiliar cuisine; harsh weather; and the threat of drones. J-C warns fellow Brazilians to brace for winter. “I tell them to imagine the beer fridge back home. That’s minus seven. Then subtract another 20.” Ortiz, a 33-year-old former Colombian marine, says the hardest thing for many Latinos is going unwashed for weeks at a time. “Using a field latrine is a shock for anyone,” he says. His solution is to stick lighted cigarettes up each nostril before approaching the stink.Communication is another challenge. Commanders are supposed to speak the relevant languages. But this is not always possible, especially if officers are killed or injured. At night, no one is talking. “We’ve developed our own ways of communicating,” says J-C. “A little touch of the ear to tell you friend or foe, for example.” There have been misinterpreted commands, he admits; even turning left instead of right. Ukraine isn’t alone in the international recruitment game: Russia’s presence is being felt in the same markets. Ortiz claims some of Colombia’s FARC guerrillas are fighting for Russia. Of foreign fighters, North Koreans have made the biggest impact. The enemy appears to be taking Ukraine’s programme seriously. Lieutenant Bezhevets says Russian intelligence regularly tries to infiltrate and gain information on his international recruits. Ortiz says his home address near Medellín has appeared on pro-Russia networks. Strange people have even showed up there. As a visible face of the recruitment campaign, he fears what would happen if he were to leave Ukraine. “If I go to an international airport, the Russians will come for me.”On the battlefield, foreign soldiers are high-value captives. Russians do not routinely make prisoner exchanges with Ukraine’s foreign fighters. In May Mr Zelensky suggested that the Kremlin would prefer to use them as leverage with the global south. The group of foreign soldiers heading for the front say they have no intention of testing that theory. In a rare moment of animation, Infante says he has made a suicide pact with himself. “The Russians might kill you,” he says, his eyes flicking left then right, before fixing on a forward stare. “But if they let you live, it won’t ever be a life worth living.” ■To stay on top of the biggest European stories, sign up to Café Europa, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.