Britain - The English Midlands is unjustly overlooked

Not least by its own inhabitants. British people tend to think in binaries, suggests Richard Parker, the mayor of the West Midlands. Right and wrong, good and bad, north and south. “There’s a big bit of the country that gets forgotten about,” he says. And that forgetting, which is partly the fault of people in the middle part of England, is a drawback in an increasingly sharp-elbowed country.The Midlands stretches from the Welsh border to the Lincolnshire coast, from the northern edge of the Cotswolds to the Peak District. It covers one-fifth of England’s land, contains 11m people and has Britain’s second-biggest city, Birmingham. It is politically crucial. Win the Midlands in a general election and you have almost certainly won the United Kingdom.Yet Mr Parker is right: the Midlands is overlooked. National politicians tend to speak of it (if at all) as an addendum to the north of England. In the mid-2010s Conservative politicians coined two phrases that expressed their hopes for an economic revival outside the south: the “northern powerhouse” and the “Midlands engine”. The former has been uttered more than 2,000 times in the House of Commons since 2014, the latter just over 300 times.Oddly, the Midlands is seldom praised or defended even by its own inhabitants. “Being a Midlander is not something you shout about,” wrote Jonathan Meades, a cultural critic, in 2020. It manages to celebrate its greatest literary son, William Shakespeare, but almost ignores its greatest daughter, George Eliot (her childhood home has become a Beefeater chain restaurant). This modesty is costly. In a highly centralised country, places that have learned to make loud, collective demands of the government are faring better.A poll by YouGov shows how peculiar the middle part of England is. Just 11% of East Midlanders and 13% of West Midlanders describe themselves as very strongly attached to their regions—the lowest proportions anywhere in Britain. Nor do people feel strongly attached to the entire Midlands. They are exceedingly modest. In south-west England, 36% declare that life in the region is a lot better than elsewhere. In the West Midlands, 7% say the same.If Midlanders identify mostly with local towns and counties, or with the whole country, it is partly because of history. The term “Midlands” is more than half a millennium old. But the regions of the East and West Midlands took their modern shapes only in the mid-20th century. Their most important institutions, the regional-development agencies, were abolished by the national government in 2011.The form of the Midlands does not help to give it a clear identity. The south-west is a peninsula; the Midlands is a sandwich filling. Apart from a few corners, notably in Derbyshire, it is pretty rather than sublime. It is a landscape of gentle hills, woods, rivers, suburbs and warehouses. Outside the Black Country, an area where coal lies close to the surface, it wears its rich industrial heritage lightly.The East Midlands has distinctive accents and words, but they are barely recognised outside the region. “If I said to you, ‘imitate a London accent, or a Scouse accent, or a Geordie accent,’ you’d know what to do,” says Natalie Braber, a sociolinguist at Nottingham Trent University. Few people could even attempt an East Midlands accent. The urban West Midlands, especially Birmingham, has a different problem. Its accent is highly distinctive and unaccountably reviled.Sometimes people’s unwillingness to tout themselves and their region slides into sullenness. “There’s a lot of doom and gloom around Leicester,” says Angela Orton, the managing director of Structural Adhesives, a manufacturer in that city. More often, though, Midlanders are neither gloomy nor resentful. They just wonder why northern English cities get so much more attention. As Ms Orton puts it: “We hear a lot about Manchester.”That city of 550,000 people, and the Greater Manchester metropolis of 2.9m that it belongs to, contrasts painfully with Birmingham and the rest of the urban West Midlands. Mr Parker says he was not surprised to discover that his fief is less successful than London. He was shocked to learn that it has fallen behind Greater Manchester. gdp per person is 17% lower, and the gap is growing (see chart).The East and West Midlands come second and third from bottom when ranking gdp per person in the nine regions of England. Only the North East fares worse. But that sad fact is not a source of identity either. Richard Vinen, the author of “Second City”, a book about Birmingham, suggests this could be due to the timing of industrial decline. The West Midlands grew strongly in the mid-20th century, thanks largely to the car industry, as northern industrial cities like Liverpool and Manchester slumped. Government policy aimed to restrict its growth.By the 1980s Birmingham and other Midlands cities were shedding industrial jobs as quickly as many northern ones. But perhaps the decline was too recent to create the sort of deep memory that shapes a regional culture. Today the Midlands sometimes seems not to realise how poor it is. In 2021 Public First, a pollster, asked people to name up to three regions that needed “levelling up”. Half of people in the East and West Midlands cited their own regions, compared with three-quarters in the North East and North West.The Midlands is, however, becoming aware of how often it is passed over by the national government. That is especially true of the East Midlands, which receives less public capital investment per person than any other part of the United Kingdom. The eastern branch of the hs2 railway, which would have run through the region, was cancelled in 2021. As for the electrification of the Midland Main Line, a crucial railway, “it’s been on, it’s off, it’s on, it’s off,” says Scott Knowles, head of the East Midlands Chamber, a business group.Other government policies have not helped. Near Chesterfield, in the north Midlands, Specialised Canvas makes and repairs the flags that hang outside boutiques in London, among many other things. Paul Noble, its managing director, says that the Midlands used to be a fine place to run a labour-intensive business: “We were here with northern overheads but serving a southern market.” Increases in the national minimum wage have eroded that advantage.One way forward is to become more like that attention-hogging metropolis to the north. The ten boroughs that comprise Greater Manchester were acting in concert even before they formed a combined authority in 2011. They tend to hide their differences in public, and speak with one voice. All recognise that Manchester is the most potent local brand, thanks in part to Manchester City and Manchester United football clubs. midas, Greater Manchester’s inward-investment agency, describes the entire metropolis as “Manchester” and “the city”.The West Midlands metropolis is as geographically unified as Greater Manchester or the Tees Valley in the North East—another place that has become good at lobbying central government. The only things separating Birmingham from Solihull or Sandwell are roadside signs. Yet its constituent local authorities insist on their distinctiveness, and the term “Greater Birmingham” is not used. Confusingly, Britain has ended up with two places called the West Midlands: a true region of 6m people and a metropolis of 3m.If the West Midlands refuses to admit its true nature, as a region dominated by a metropolis with Birmingham at its heart, the East Midlands is truly polycentric. Its most important towns and cities are all medium-sized, with populations between 100,000 and 400,000: Derby, Leicester, Lincoln, Northampton and Nottingham. All politely keep to themselves, and do not sprawl.As a result, the East Midlands is struggling to respond to the Labour government’s attempt to reorganise local politics. The national government wants every part of England to form regional clumps with at least 1.5m people, the better (in theory) to take control of transport, planning and development. In some parts of England, this is easily done. Add East Sussex, West Sussex and Brighton, on the south coast, and you have a logical region of 1.7m people.The East Midlands is trickier. It already has two regional clumps: Greater Lincolnshire and the maddeningly named East Midlands County Combined Authority, which includes Derby and Nottingham. But what should Leicester do? Glued to Leicestershire and Rutland, it is still not big enough. And what about Northampton? It might join parts of the south-east.Despite a long history, the Midlands has struggled to articulate a clear identity. It is distinctive in its unwillingness to express its distinctiveness. But in a country where other places have learned to speak together, that is not enough. ■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in Britain, sign up to Blighty, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.