Middle East & Africa - Africa’s scary new age of high-tech warfare

The proliferation of new technology could make conflicts even longer and deadlier. Once infamous for fighting on horseback and ransacking villages like medieval raiders, the Rapid Support Forces (RSF) recently acquired the weapons of 21st-century war. In early May the Sudanese militia, which has been fighting the country’s army since April 2023, launched drone strikes on Port Sudan, an army stronghold on the Red Sea coast. The attack damaged Sudan’s only functioning airport and the city’s main power station. Yet its most enduring impact was psychological. More than 1,000 kilometres away from any known RSF base, Port Sudan was long considered safe. The RSF’s drones demolished that assumption.The strikes are the most recent illustration of how drones are changing the character of war in Africa. For decades the continent’s wars have been land-based, fought largely by light mobile infantry units. Air power was too costly and too complex for most armies. Today’s drones, by contrast, are both cheap and deadly. For now, they can sometimes provide a decisive advantage in a conflict. But they may ultimately make the continent’s wars easier to start and harder to end.Drones are becoming ubiquitous in Africa. By 2023, some 30 African governments had bought an unmanned system of some kind. Data from the Armed Conflict Location and Event Data project (ACLED) show a surge in drone activity: 484 drone strikes were carried out across 13 African countries in 2024, more than twice as many as in 2023. More than 1,200 people were killed in such strikes (see chart).Unlike the smaller first-person view (FPV) drones that litter the skies in Ukraine, most systems deployed by African forces are medium-altitude long-endurance (MALE) drones. They are bulkier, fly at higher altitudes for longer, and carry larger payloads. The most popular is Turkey’s Bayraktar TB2, which costs around $5m. Other suppliers include the United Arab Emirates (UAE), China and Iran.In Russia’s war in Ukraine, the ubiquity of drones on both sides has produced a grinding war of attrition. In Africa, drones have sometimes given one side a decisive advantage. In the summer of 2021 rebel forces from Tigray in northern Ethiopia marched to the gates of the capital, Addis Ababa, threatening to topple the government. But the stunning offensive left the rebels’ supply lines exposed. The Ethiopian government had built up a large arsenal of drones from Turkey, Iran and the UAE. It used them to wreak havoc on Tigrayan logistics and beat back the assault, a turning-point in a war it eventually won. “We could have captured Addis easily,” laments a former intelligence officer from Tigray, who was involved in the offensive. “It was those fucking drones…We had no way of shooting them down.”Drones have shifted the balance of power in other conflicts, too. Before the RSF’s attacks on Port Sudan, the Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF) used drones to attack the RSF’s supply lines, helping it recapture Khartoum, the capital, in March. In 2023 Turkish drones helped Mali’s junta retake the northern city of Kidal, booting out the Tuareg separatists who had ruled it for more than a decade.Yet drones alone cannot always turn the tide. The SAF’s recapture of Khartoum required months of gruelling, door-to-door fighting, even though drones helped with intelligence-gathering. They are not particularly useful when opponents hide in mountains or rainforests, or embed with civilian populations. Despite their success in Tigray, Ethiopia’s drones have been ineffective against rebels in the mountainous Amhara region. In Mali, Niger and Burkina Faso, drones struggle to cover the vast distances involved in campaigns in the Sahel. Jihadist insurgencies there continue to spread as fighters have been quick to adapt to the new threat. They now use motorbikes instead of pickup trucks, so they can disperse fast and evade aerial surveillance. In eastern Congo fighters from M23, a militia backed by Rwanda, have used jammers to blunt drones fielded by UN peacekeepers. They reportedly shot down a Chinese MALE drone used by Congo’s army.Most importantly, because drones are cheap, plentiful and easy to transport, they can be acquired by all sides in a conflict. On June 13th Tuareg insurgents in northern Mali appear to have used FPV drones, similar to those used by Ukraine, to devastate a convoy of Russian mercenaries crossing the desert.The proliferation of drones offers governments a cheap way to keep rebels in check without suffering many casualties. That could lower their willingness to strike negotiated agreements. It also boosts the arsenals of non-state actors and makes it easier for foreign powers to support proxies in Africa. The result could be more and longer wars on the continent. ■Sign up to the Analysing Africa, a weekly newsletter that keeps you in the loop about the world’s youngest—and least understood—continent.