Europe - Serbia’s Aleksandar Vucic is rattled 

Huge demonstrations led by students calling for elections are proving resilient. As the academic year ends, students must choose whether to graduate this year or go for broke in their push to bring down Aleksandar Vucic. The demonstrations that began in winter have refused to die down and have become a lightning-rod for opposition to the president. Though they have so far failed to topple him, he has failed to snuff them out.Protests began when a concrete canopy at the railway station in Serbia’s second city, Novi Sad, collapsed last November, killing 16 people. The station had just been refurbished, so corruption was widely suspected. Mr Vucic replaced his prime minister in a bid to appease the protesters, to no avail. The students refused to co-operate with Serbia’s established but feeble opposition parties, at first saying they merely wanted justice in Novi Sad—and a better-run country. But in March they began calling for early elections.Mr Vucic has held sway over Serbia in various posts since 2012 and was a powerful figure under Slobodan Milosevic, who led Serbia during the Balkan wars in the 1990s and was overthrown in 2000. In the past few years he has brushed off several waves of protest, including against controversial plans to mine lithium, a project the European Commission this month designated as being of “strategic importance”.A candidate for EU membership, Serbia under Mr Vucic has managed to be friendly to Russia yet supply arms to Ukraine. His ruling party is a patronage machine that gives supporters jobs in exchange for votes. It controls all the mainstream media. His party won a snap election in 2023.But the latest protests are rattling him. He accuses the students of being paid by foreign countries and has talked of a mysterious coup attempt. Liberal NGOs are attacked for accepting funds from abroad. In the past decade the EU has donated €64m ($74m) for civil-society initiatives. But that is a fraction of what it has given the government to modernise Serbia as a whole.On March 15th, during what may have been the biggest demonstration in Serbia’s history, panic broke out, apparently stirred up by the police using long-range acoustic devices. EXIT, a big music festival in Novi Sad that put Serbia back on the cultural map after the Balkan wars, has had its government funding yanked for supporting the students, so this year’s event will be the last on its home territory.Local elections on June 8th in two small towns where Mr Vucic’s party has in the past got almost 80% of the vote saw it scrape home by a whisker. So Mr Vucic is loth to agree to early elections. But he may now be setting the students against each other. For months they have kept the universities closed. The government has stopped paying the bills. Lecturers are being paid only 12.5% of their salary, since the government says they are not teaching.Vladan Djokic, Belgrade University’s rector, has been negotiating with the government to hold summer classes mainly online to let students finish their academic year which in turn will permit enrolment for next year. He is popular with the students and faces trumped-up criminal charges relating to the university closures. If the student blockade of the universities persists, he says the government could begin purging academics it dislikes, including him. But if he loses his job, he would be free to help lead a post-Vucic Serbia. ■To stay on top of the biggest European stories, sign up to Café Europa, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.