Middle East & Africa - The war in Sudan is spilling over its borders

Fighting in the desert between Libya and Egypt will make the conflict even harder to end. When the Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF) recaptured Khartoum, Sudan’s capital, in March, some of the army’s supporters thought its victory was near. Some of the more than 14m Sudanese displaced by the war have begun returning home. The rest of the world is paying little attention to a humanitarian disaster in the country of 50m people.But Sudan’s war is far from over. In recent days the Rapid Support Forces (RSF), the army’s main adversary, advanced into the strategic borderlands between Sudan and its northern neighbours, Libya and Egypt. On June 11th the SAF insisted that it was evacuating the “triangle” area as part of “defensive arrangements”. Yet within a few days the RSF also overran the Chevrolet garrison in Sudan’s Northern region, some 100km south of the triangle (see map). It appears to have had help from a militia loyal to Khalifa Haftar, the warlord who rules eastern Libya.Mr Haftar is far from the only outsider to meddle in Sudan’s war. Foreign fighters have poured over its borders ever since fighting erupted in 2023. The United Arab Emirates (UAE) has sent arms to the RSF with the support of governments in Chad, South Sudan and Kenya. Egypt, a strong supporter of the SAF, has reportedly provided it with air support. Russia, Turkey and Iran have sold it weapons and drones.Yet Mr Haftar’s involvement is particularly significant. Like the RSF’s leader, Muhammad Hamdan Dagalo (known as Hemedti), he is an ally of the UAE. His forces have helped the RSF smuggle fuel, cars and weapons into Darfur, according to the UN. The RSF also has training camps in southern Libya, says Justin Lynch of Conflict Insights Group, which monitors the war.The SAF’s capture of the Chevrolet base in the first week of the war disrupted the RSF’s supply lines from Libya, so its return gives Mr Dagalo a much-needed boost. It also hampers the SAF’s ability to supply el-Fasher, the capital of Darfur that has been under siege for more than a year. Control of the triangle could let the RSF threaten the Northern region, one of few parts of Sudan largely untouched by war.The army will hope that the RSF’s presence so close to the Egyptian border will prompt its northern neighbour to step up. But Egypt may be unwilling to alienate the UAE, which bailed out its cash-strapped government with $35bn in 2024. “Egypt simply doesn’t have the money or bandwidth” to become much more involved in the war, says Kholood Khair of Confluence Advisory, a Sudanese think-tank. Turkey, by contrast, has long opposed Mr Haftar and competes with the UAE for influence in the region. If Mr Haftar’s forces get directly involved in the fighting, Turkey may ramp up its support for the SAF.Foreign meddling helps prolong the war. The RSF has expanded its use of UAE-supplied drones to target civilian and military infrastructure. The SAF is bent on a victory that looks hard to achieve. A forthcoming study in the Lancet Global Health estimates that in Khartoum state alone, between 12,600 and 58,700 people were killed by “intentional injuries” between April 2023 and June 2024, with countless others dying of hunger and disease. Many more will have perished since then. The toll continues to rise. ■Sign up to the Analysing Africa, a weekly newsletter that keeps you in the loop about the world’s youngest—and least understood—continent.