Europe - Corruption at the heart of his party wounds Spain’s prime minister

Pedro Sánchez is a survivor, but it is getting harder. PEDRO SÁNCHEZ came to power in 2018 through a censure motion that ousted his conservative predecessor, Mariano Rajoy, after a court found the centre-right People’s Party (PP) had practised “institutionalised corruption”. Mr Sánchez promised “democratic regeneration”. But he and his Socialist Party have now come almost full circle. After a judge released a police report containing devastating evidence of systematic corruption by two of Mr Sánchez’s closest party aides, a sombre prime minister apologised eight times at a press conference on June 12th. He promised a shake-up in the party leadership and an external audit of its finances. That is unlikely to be enough to restore his authority, or perhaps even to save his job.The police report accused Santos Cerdán, a senior party official, of “managing” at least €620,000 in bribes on public-works contracts from Acciona, a construction company which this week fired a senior manager. Despite months of rumours, Mr Sánchez had backed his aide to the last minute before summarily firing him. Nominally the number three in the hierarchy, in practice Mr Cerdán ran the party, drawing up candidate lists and sidelining the prime minister’s internal critics.The report includes tapes made by Koldo García, who was arrested on suspicion of corruption in February 2024. A former bouncer at a brothel in Navarre, he became an aide to José Luis Ábalos, who preceded Mr Cerdán in his party role and was also transport minister. Mr Ábalos was fired from both jobs, without explanation, in 2021 and now faces trial at the Supreme Court on charges of racketeering. He is also accused of placing several young female companions in public-sector jobs that were sinecures. In the tapes, he and Mr García discuss the merits of several prostitutes. For a party that, at Mr Sánchez’s urging, officially calls itself feminist, that is hard to take.The prime minister has tried to present the affair as a party, rather than government, matter. But Mr Cerdán, who like Mr Ábalos insists he is innocent, also acted more broadly as a trouble-shooter, entrusted with negotiating a controversial amnesty for Catalan separatists in return for parliamentary support for the government from the party of Carles Puigdemont, a fugitive separatist leader.Mr Sánchez’s minority government also depends on the backing of hard-left and other Basque and Catalan nationalist parties. He has been unable to pass a budget since 2023 and has not dared to seek their approval for a big increase in defence spending to meet NATO’s target of 2% of GDP. He clings on because those parties have disliked the idea of a censure motion that would probably bring to office Alberto Núñez Feijóo, the PP leader, with the backing of Vox, a hard-right outfit.Mr Sánchez insists he will govern until the end of the parliamentary term in 2027 and will continue to pursue a socially progressive agenda. But the repeated claim of his officials that he is the victim of a right-wing plot, which includes judicial investigations of his wife and brother, has been undermined. Through Mr Cerdán he has hitherto held a tight grip over his party. With his judgment questioned and with the fear of further corruption revelations, some Socialist leaders say he should call an early general election so this will not coincide with important regional votes due in two years’ time. Others say he should seek a non-binding confidence motion, though he might lose it. Neither are attractive options. Mr Sánchez has brushed off countless setbacks in the past. His instinct will be to try to do so again. By common consent, this time it will be harder. ■To stay on top of the biggest European stories, sign up to Café Europa, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.