Europe - Next week’s NATO summit will be all about placating Donald Trump

The Europeans plan to keep it short and snappy. FOUR MONTHS ago Friedrich Merz, freshly triumphant in Germany’s election, mused aloud that the largest, longest-lasting and most successful alliance in modern history might soon evaporate. “I am very curious to see how we are heading towards the NATO summit at the end of June,” he remarked. “Whether we will still be talking about NATO in its current form or whether we will have to establish an independent European defence capability much more quickly.”Days away from that summit, NATO is alive and Mr Merz has changed his tune. “I have no doubt whatsoever that the American government is committed to NATO,” he pronounced, a day after meeting Donald Trump, America’s president, on June 5th at the White House. But the leaders gathering in The Hague on June 24th are taking no chances. The summit will be a short and tightly choreographed affair, minimising opportunities for Mr Trump, who walked out of a G7 summit in Canada early on June 16th, to cause a ruckus, as he did in 2018 when he came close to announcing that America would leave the alliance.The agenda will be dominated by one of Mr Trump’s favourite hobbyhorses: defence spending. Twenty-three members of nato now meet the twin targets of spending 2% of gdp on defence and 20% of defence budgets on equipment. In The Hague, the allies will agree on and announce a new spending target: that all allies should spend 3.5% of GDP on what Mark Rutte, NATO’s secretary-general, has described as “core military requirements”, with an additional 1.5% of GDP on defence-related spending, such as infrastructure and industrial capacity. Spain is the only holdout; it is expected to fold.The real debate now is over the timeline for reaching that target. Central and eastern European states are pushing for 2032. Those with further to go and that are less exercised by the threat, such as Slovakia, want 2035. The former would cause conniptions among many European finance ministries, implying an even more rapid rise in defence spending. The latter would bring to mind the Wales summit of 2014, when allies agreed on a 2% target but moved towards it with astonishing torpor. Mr Rutte says that he is also eager to avoid a “hockey stick”, in which allies spend all the money in the last year or two. “You cannot spend all that money in one year, there is an absorption capacity issue.”The extra money is intended to fund new capabilities required by the defence plans drawn up by the alliance’s military headquarters. On June 9th Mr Rutte pointed out that this involved, among other things, a 400% increase in air and missile defence systems. There was an “audible gasp in the room” of military planners when that was announced internally, recalls Rachel Ellehuus, who was until recently part of the American delegation to NATO, and now leads the Royal United Services Institute, a think-tank in London.In February the mood among European allies was shock and anger. Mr Trump’s administration had just humiliated Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, opened direct talks with Russia and announced that it would no longer lead the conventional defence of Europe. Through the spring and summer, that has given way to acceptance and pragmatism.One senior American official says that concerns that America will pull large numbers of troops out of Europe are likely to be overblown. Most American assets in Europe, including F-35 jets and destroyers, could be moved to the Pacific if needed fairly quickly, he says. It would cost billions of dollars to build new barracks in America. “If they’d like to have them there,” said Mr Trump on June 5th, of troops in Germany, “we have a lot of them.”Nonetheless, European allies increasingly recognise that they may not always be able to count on key American capabilities. “We need ten years for this transition,” says a European official. “Seven years minimum.” The direction of travel is clear. Non-American members of NATO (Europe plus Canada and Turkey) doubled their spending on equipment between 2018 and 2024, a period in which America’s grew by just 5%, according to Janes, a military data firm. America’s share of NATO’s total investment spending has fallen from 83% in 2010 to 65% this year.nato’s military side is also in the throes of change. General Chris Cavoli is departing as Supreme Allied Commander Europe (saceur) after three years in the job. “In the long line of saceurs,” says a European diplomat, “he really stands out.” His replacement, Alexus Grynkewich, an air force general, now faces the task of fleshing out the plans that General Cavoli drew up. One element of that is an “Eastern Flank Deterrence Line” developed by General Chris Donahue of Allied Land Command. The idea, says one insider, is that nato ground forces, drawing on lessons from Ukraine, use “new forms of mass”—drones, but also cheaper cruise missiles—to defeat a larger Russian force. The concept is a “new, cheaper way of doing business”, he says. It has been refined over the past three months in simulations. Its final validation will come in a big exercise next May, Steadfast Defender.Money and military strategy are not the only things on the agenda, though. “The United States would like the summit to be only about the 5%,” says one diplomat, “and a healthy majority of Europeans want the summit to be also about the reasons for the 5%—Russia and Ukraine.” European allies want Mr Trump to follow through on his threat of imposing sanctions on Russia over its refusal to agree to a ceasefire in Ukraine. On June 16th Mr Trump, speaking at the G7, instead repeated his call for Russia to be readmitted to the group, lamented the cost of sanctions and cancelled a planned meeting with Mr Zelensky, who is also due to attend a state dinner in The Hague. The increasing likelihood of American intervention in Iran will also test Mr Trump’s short attention span.In ordinary times the allies would discuss a wide range of other issues. This time round there is expected to be little or nothing on the challenge posed by China, nuclear weapons and arms control, space security, and NATO’s wider neighbourhood. The communiqué traditionally published at the end of the summit is likely to be shorter than usual. If that is the price to pay for placating Mr Trump, suggest NATO officials, so be it. “NATO was never established to have a Kumbaya,” reflected Mr Rutte, “where we would immediately, from minute one, agree on everything.” ■To stay on top of the biggest European stories, sign up to Café Europa, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.