Europe - A revival for the classic Renault 5

Now with an electric motor and a baguette-holder. When Citroën, a French carmaker, launched its futuristic DS in 1955, Roland Barthes, a structuralist writer, described it as “spiritual”. The car’s initials (déesse) said it all: “goddess”. In later decades France’s car manufacturers became better known for inventing sensible people-carriers and other functional vehicles that merely did the job. Now, however, Renault, another French carmaker, has tapped into that retro cool with a new runaway success: a fully electric remodelled version of the Renault 5, first on the road in 1972.The new-look R5, which comes in such garish shades as sunflower yellow and football-pitch green, has topped sales of electric cars so far this year in France. Between January and May it sold more than twice as many there as the Tesla Model Y, one of Elon Musk’s (more expensive) electric vehicles. The R5 has turned heads outside France, too. “Rarely has a car ever caused such a stir” noted Car, a British publication, recently. Another British magazine, What Car?, named it car of the year 2025.What explains this surprise hit, against competition from cheap Chinese EVs and other revamped retro classics? Motoring fanatics say that the remodelled R5 neatly combines retro chic and original styling with state-of-the art EV touches. Indeed Renault’s boss, Luca de Meo, has just been poached by a French luxury house, Kering. The runabout is also reasonably cheap, yet its battery has a decent range. The French like the R5 because, naturellement, it is French-built, using electric batteries made in a factory in France, opened by President Emmanuel Macron this month. This chimes with the country’s freshly fashionable ambitions for “strategic autonomy”.For its part, Renault claims that it has reinterpreted a pop icon by taking a “retrofuturistic” approach. The new R5, it insists, is “fun, playful, friendly” and oozes French charm. What its marketing literature barely mentions is perhaps one of the car’s secret selling points, at least at home. The R5 comes with an optional and detachable tubular basket known as a porte-baguette, or baguette-holder, to store the only accessory motorists in France really need. ■To stay on top of the biggest European stories, sign up to Café Europa, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.