Britain - MI6’s new “C” used to be “Q”. And she’s good with the gadgets

Blaise Metreweli is the first female head of Britain’s spy service, too. IN 1994 Britain’s Secret Intelligence Service, more commonly known as MI6, appointed a new chief. David Spedding was only the second chief to be named in public. Until that year the service did not officially exist. His predecessor, Sir Colin McColl, had refused to be photographed at a press conference. “Secrecy”, he explained, “is our stock-in-trade.”Times have changed. On June 15th the government announced that Blaise Metreweli, a 47-year-old career intelligence officer, would take over from Sir Richard Moore as chief. The government published a photograph of Ms Metreweli, currently director-general of “Q” branch, in charge of technology and innovation. Newspapers printed accounts of contemporaries who had rowed with her at Cambridge.The government has emphasised the fact that Ms Metreweli is the first woman to hold the role. In the cold war, women were treated as inferior agent-runners and had to resign if they married. “Even into the 1990s, the few senior women in the service were unmarried,” notes Dan Lomas, an intelligence historian, resulting in the service “losing a very talented generation of women”. Today three out of MI6’s four director-generals are women.No less important is a generational shift. Sir Richard began his career in 1988, shortly before the fall of the Berlin Wall, a period in which the service was forced to prioritise new types of security issues such as organised crime and counter-narcotics. Ms Metreweli joined in 1999, shortly before the 9/11 attacks pushed counter-terrorism to the top of the agenda.In 2021, speaking under a pseudonym, she told the Financial Times that her first job, in counter-proliferation, had allowed her to engage with the “really deep science” of nuclear technology. Diplomatic lists suggest she was stationed in the Basra station in Iraq after the British invasion. She later served in Europe, other parts of the Middle East and in the branch of MI5—Britain’s security service—countering hostile state activity. She has always been “operational to her fingertips”, says a source.The selection for the job is said to have come down to two women: Ms Metreweli was up against Barbara Woodward, a former ambassador to China. Some insiders thought that Dame Barbara, a seasoned diplomat, might have the upper hand. In recent years, the job has become dominated by intelligence diplomacy, with spy chiefs shuttling around the world to share intelligence and conduct backchannel talks. The fact that an internal candidate experienced in recruiting and running agents won out will please many in MI6. It suggests that Sir Keir Starmer, the prime minister, wanted someone with operational experience and technological nous, rather than diplomatic gravitas.Ms Metreweli’s strongest suit is her involvement with tech issues. As head of Q branch (familiar to James Bond aficionados) she has led on artificial intelligence (AI) not just for MI6, but the entire UK Intelligence Community (UKIC) which also includes MI5 and GCHQ, among other bodies. She is thought to have lobbied hard for a shift in resources towards AI, often in the face of scepticism. She is a familiar figure at tech conferences and is well-regarded among tech executives.Her challenge will be transforming the organisation internally while dealing with a growing set of threats: a wounded Iranian regime that might lash out, Russian subversion across Europe and Chinese spy agencies that match the entire Five Eyes alliance—America, Australia, Britain, Canada and New Zealand—in size. The spending review on June 11th allocated an extra £600m ($813m) to the intelligence agencies, “reflecting the rising demand…to illuminate and deter threats”. ■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in Britain, sign up to Blighty, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.