Britain - The rise of Nigel McFarage

Reform UK fractures the myth of progressive Scotland. FOR A MAN described as an English nationalist, Nigel Farage is doing rather well in Scotland. He may confess no connection to the country other than a love of golf and angling. He may be the father of Brexit, whereas Scotland voted heavily to remain in the EU. But Reform UK, his party, now polls second in Scotland, on 25% (it is first, on 30%, in Britain at large). It won a chunky third place in a by-election in Hamilton, Larkhall and Stonehouse, near Glasgow, on June 5th; were those swings repeated in the Scottish Parliament elections next May, Reform would be the biggest opposition party, reckons Sir John Curtice, a psephologist. If Mr Farage makes it to Downing Street, Scotland will have helped him.This wasn’t meant to happen. After Mr Farage triumphed in English local elections in May, John Swinney, Scotland’s first minister, spoke darkly of an ill wind blowing “south of the border”. Naturally, he had a solution to spare Scotland: independence. For years the Scottish National Party (SNP) has traded on a cultural exceptionalism, which holds that divorce is necessary, even inevitable, because Scotland is more progressive and more reasonable than its southern neighbour. (Indeed, the Tories have not won a plurality of seats in Scotland since the 1950s.) But Mr Farage’s rise north of the border punctures this story. His success is a reminder that Scotland is more conservative, and more English, than the nationalists pretend. And far from being an antidote to Mr Farage’s populism, the nationalist cause is its mirror.Exceptionalism has weak foundations. The World Values Survey, a study run since 1981, tracks social attitudes on a traditional-to-liberal spectrum (an index that measures views on issues such as abortion, divorce and sexuality); and on an economic left-right spectrum (covering inequality, state ownership and competition). Data from 2022 show no statistically significant difference between England and Scotland on either measure, says Paolo Morini of King’s College London. Scots and the English have grown more socially liberal in step for years, while attitudes on the economy have converged as support for a big state grows in England.Scotland has plenty of the fuel that sustains Mr Farage in England. Scots are more supportive of immigration than the English, but the majority who think it too high has grown fast. Scots are just as mistrustful of MPs, the media and the British government as the English. They are no more supportive of trans rights, and just as sceptical of net-zero targets.Mr Swinney presents Scotland as a haven from Mr Farage’s populism. The contrary is true: in the populist pandemic that has roiled Europe and America since the global financial crisis, Scotland was Patient Zero. True, the SNP preaches a civic rather than an ethnic nationalism; it does not scapegoat migrants. But many of the other malign symptoms that afflict rich democracies were seen early in the independence referendum of 2014.Two years before Brexiteers declared sovereignty a panacea for Britain’s problems, the SNP promised that everything would be possible if only Scots “take control”. Before the Brexiteers denounced economists who queried their project as part of “Project Fear”, the SNP used the same mocking epithet for those who asked what currency their new state would use. Before America fretted about Twitter trolls, Scottish politicians complained of online pests they called “cybernats”. Before Donald Trump moaned that the “deep state” had “stolen” his election, senior nationalists hinted that MI5 would sabotage the referendum. At the time this appeared eccentric. Now it looks like a taste of trouble to come.In those years businesses and academics learned to bite their tongues. In a small country, to doubt the governing party’s founding cause could be career-limiting. Fantasies went unchecked. And so if Mr Farage finds his make-a-wish politics thrives there, it is because the SNP has weakened the country’s immune system.The SNP presents its movement as wholly Europhile. The reality is more complicated. Up to a third of those who supported Scottish independence would go on to back Brexit; a quarter of Mr Farage’s supporters, polls suggest, are pro-independence. Call this tribe the double-out voters, who would gladly smash both unions, British and European. They are why Reform organisers are excited by the party’s second-place council by-election result in May in Clydebank, once a shipbuilding district in Glasgow known as Red Clydeside for its radicalism. Some voters there have mounted successive protests: for independence, and then Brexit; for the SNP, then Labour. Now they are Nigel’s. “They feel scunnered with the whole system, and they’ve tried to use their vote to express that anger,” says Thomas Kerr, a Reform councillor.Is it so hard to imagine Mr Farage bestriding Scotland? Consider another politician with a strikingly similar résumé. He left a career in finance to take his movement from the fringe to the mainstream, with a politics that melded North Sea oil, tax cuts, welfare largesse and flag-waving. (Later, when it was opportune, came anti-woke crusades.) He sought to break the British ruling class, but hankered to be the toast of the country club. He liked drink, cigars, women, horses and Rupert Murdoch. He was charming, vain, grudge-harbouring and bullying; a man of the people who travelled by helicopter, with many followers and few true friends.That politician was Alex Salmond, the Scottish first minister who led the SNP to its first referendum. He and Mr Farage were mutual admirers. “I have a sneaking regard for anyone who takes on powerful establishments” (Salmond on Mr Farage). “The best operator in Scottish politics by a country mile” (Mr Farage on Salmond). Salmond died last year, aged 69; Holyrood is duller without him. There is a vacancy for the difficult auld man of Scottish politics—and a candidate to fill it. ■Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.