Britain - Britain’s newest way of demoralising doctors

A lottery decides where they will work. NEWLY QUALIFIED doctors in Britain have plenty to gripe about. A shortage of funding in general practice has left some working as taxi drivers. The doctors’ union, the British Medical Association (BMA), is voting on whether to strike over pay. One frustration is particularly intense: the sense of being treated as expendable by the system they’re meant to serve. Nowhere is that more evident than in the way new doctors are assigned their first jobs—a process that has also managed to make even mild-mannered economists mad.Until recently Britain’s system for matching doctors to hospitals resembled America’s. Applicants to its two-year foundation programme were ranked by academic performance, in part through a multiple-choice “situational judgment test”. Top performers got first pick of deaneries, or geographical areas. The system was not flawless. Critics said it fostered unhealthy competition (the best physicians are not always the best test-takers) and some argued there was no consensus on the right answers. Those from ethnic minorities often did less well on the judgment test and ended up in less desirable places.In 2024 the National Health Service (NHS) introduced a reform aimed at fixing these issues. Instead of relying on exam scores, it assigns applicants a computer-generated rank to prioritise their choices. The result is that a merit-based selection has instead become a random one. This baffles economists. “It’s very unusual,” says Alexander Teytelboym, a professor at the University of Oxford who studies market design (and a former contributor to The Economist). “I can’t think of many other high-stakes systems where effort and achievement are encouraged, but the entire allocation is done by lottery.”On paper, the new system looks successful: in 2024, 75% of applicants secured their first-choice area, up from 71% in 2023. Yet these figures are misleading, says Aytek Erdil, an economist who, along with his colleague, Battal Dogan, wrote a paper on the proposal in 2023. A feature of the algorithm is that it tries to maximise the number of students getting their first choice. This encourages “a complicated game” of guesswork among applicants, he explains. The savviest know that London gets three times as many applicants as there are places, so they may pick somewhere else. Those who report their true preferences are more likely to miss out. Because top spots fill up first, a growing number now end up with their last choice.This can be demoralising. Before, if you didn’t get London, it was because one of your peers outperformed you. Now a lottery decides whether you end up in the capital of England or in Northern Ireland. That risks eroding incentives to study hard, and could undermine trust in medical-school rankings. It is also “quite stressful”, says Tads Ciecierski-Holmes, who will soon begin working in the NHS, and whose friends spent a lot of emotional energy on the “mental gymnastics” of gaming the job-assignment system. The outcomes can also play havoc with the love lives of doctors who have coupled up.The BMA is pushing for changes. Among other things, it wants to minimise the number of students who are allocated their lowest preferences. Its main concern is the number of “placeholders”: applicants assigned a vague location—such as Scotland or Cornwall—but not given details of where exactly their job will be. “There are practical considerations if you have to move across the country with three weeks’ notice,” says Elgan Manton-Roseblade from the BMA’s wing of medical students. This year almost 700 applicants were left in such limbo. Some of them considered going abroad instead.More broadly, there are better ways to match people to places. India’s civil service, which serves a far bigger population, has managed to design a system that balances merit and equity. Messrs Erdil and Dogan suggest a compromise: allocate some posts by lottery but retain academic scores for the rest. Some relatively simple fixes may help doctors feel less like “numbers on spreadsheets”, as one disgruntled physician puts it. There are more ways to keep medics happy than just money. ■Correction (June 15th 2025): The original version of this article wrongly stated that there were 700 “placeholders” last year. In fact there were 700 this year.For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in Britain, sign up to Blighty, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.