Business - Can a car boss turn around Gucci’s owner?

Kering is the latest troubled firm to seek an outside saviour. THE RENAULT Twingo Equilibre is a pint-sized runaround for the thrifty. The special-edition Gucci Jackie Notte handbag is an iconic accessory for the loaded. Besides being available in black and a price tag on a similar order of magnitude—€14,000 and €10,000 ($16,000 and $11,500), respectively—the two appear to be nothing alike. On June 16th, they acquired an unexpected fresh commonality: Luca de Meo.The previous day Mr de Meo stunned the automotive world when, out of nowhere, he resigned as chief executive of the French carmaker after five years at the wheel. A titillating 24-hour silence later, Kering, a luxury conglomerate which counts Gucci among its posh labels, confirmed rumours that he would be taking over as its new CEO in September. François-Henri Pinault, the current boss and controlling shareholder, who will stay on as chairman, praised the dapper Italian’s “experience at the helm of an international listed group, his sharp understanding of brands and his sense of a strong and respectful corporate culture”.The news instantly added €2.5bn to Kering’s market capitalisation, which jumped to €24bn on June 16th, and shaved €1bn from Renault’s, which dipped below €11bn. Like Mr Pinault, investors are counting on Mr de Meo to regain ground lost by Kering in recent years to LVMH and Hermès, two luxury rivals—and to recoup some of the €75bn in shareholder value lost since 2021.Other luxury businesses have put their faith in industry outsiders in recent years. Audemars Piguet, a Swiss watchmaker, plumped for a shampoo executive at P&G turned perfume boss. LVMH promoted another former hair-care veteran, from Henkel, to lead its flagship Louis Vuitton brand. Chanel picked Unilever’s HR boss. Ferrari (whose largest shareholder, Exor, part-owns The Economist’s parent company) is headed by an erstwhile semiconductor manager. Each is regarded as having done a decent job. But none of them inherited a company in desperate need of strategic reinvention, which is Kering’s predicament. So are investors right to cheer Mr de Meo’s appointment?Mr de Meo has certainly done well by Renault, which he has steered out of a powerslide into irrelevance. He refreshed its stale offering (with new electric models), slashed debt (from massive to manageable), and improved operating margins (from negative to respectable) and return on capital (from nothing to something). On his watch the French firm’s share price doubled while those of mass-market European rivals either slid (Volkswagen) or stagnated (Stellantis, which owns Fiat, Chrysler, Peugeot and Citroën, among other marques, and in which Exor also holds a large stake).Adding to Mr de Meo’s appeal is the fact that Renault was not a one-off. In the 2000s he spruced up Fiat and Alfa Romeo (both part of Stellantis’s corporate forebear). As president of SEAT between 2015 and 2020 he turned the bland Spanish marque into one of Volkswagen’s raciest units. All this has earned him a reputation not just as a turnaround star but a serial one.Makeover merchants are not uncommon in the corporate world. Moving sharp executives from one underperforming firm to another is part of the private-equity business model. But, observes Steven Kaplan of the Booth School of Business at the University of Chicago, they tend to have industry experience. Itinerant CEOs who hop between sectors usually specialise in fixing firms in financial distress. Cleaning up balance-sheets and dealing with creditors are transferrable talents, says Joost de Haas, who teaches a course on turnarounds at INSEAD business school (and is himself a practising turnaround artist of 20-plus years).Kering is not in such a “special situation”. Last year it generated €2.6bn in operating profit from selling €17.2bn-worth of bling. That is worse than Hermès or LVMH and down relative to previous years, but hardly cataclysmic. What it needs is a new look. It is betting that Mr de Meo will provide it by being its Lou Gerstner. In the 1980s and 1990s Mr Gerstner earned a reputation as an industry-agnostic strategic saviour by reviving the fortunes of businesses in finance (at American Express’s travel division), consumer goods (as boss of RJR Nabisco, following its buy-out by private-equity barbarians) and technology (running IBM).Jan Adriaanse of Leiden University points out that industry novices may be particularly valuable at a time when a sector as a whole is struggling. This was true of IBM’s core mainframe business in the 1990s, when Mr Gerstner reimagined Big Blue as an IT-services powerhouse. It is the case now in luxury, facing a possibly secular slowdown in China, whose bling-obsessed consumers were meant to fill its hand-stitched coffers for years to come. LVMH has lost nearly half its market value in the past year. Even Hermès, which this year overtook LVMH as the most richly valued luxury group, is down by nearly a fifth since February.The danger for Kering is that instead of Mr Gerstner it gets a Bob Nardelli. Mr Nardelli rose up the ranks at General Electric to become one of the most lauded lieutenants to Jack Welch, the industrial conglomerate’s legendary leader in the 1990s. He then moved on to disappointment in retail (as CEO of Home Depot in 2000-07, when the home-improvement chain lagged behind competitors such as Lowe’s) and disaster in cars (Chrysler went bust on his watch in 2009). His signature post-GE achievement was the $210m in severance he pocketed courtesy of Home Depot.Even if Mr de Meo is more Gerstner than Nardelli, there is another risk: Mr Pinault. His grip on Kering let him take a punt on a luxury neophyte where many boards would have preferred a less audacious choice. If Mr de Meo is to have any hope of succeeding, this grip must be relaxed. Mr Pinault has pledged “to be at his side”. He must resist the urge to steer from the back seat. ■Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.