Culture - Is the manosphere silly, sinister—or both? 

A new book examines a much-worried-about phenomenon. “Ihave been noticing you around.” The statement—spoken by a young woman on an American university campus in 1978—was clear, simple and ever so slightly suggestive. It was followed by another, even more suggestive statement: “I find you to be very attractive.” Then came an even clearer question: “Would you go to bed with me tonight?”Except this was not quite as simple as it seemed, for eight of the woman’s peers, male and female, also trotted out the phrases to other people on campus. It was not just a chat-up line. It was a psychology experiment designed to see whether men or women are more sexually picky.That experiment has since become famous, partly because those pick-up lines were later incorporated, with added electronica and trumpet, into a British pop song in the 1990s, and partly because it has—more traditionally for a psychology study—been cited in numerous academic papers (almost 1,200, at the last count).Yet the main reason for the experiment’s renown is that the responses were striking: 75% of the men surveyed said that they would like to have sex with a total stranger (or declined, apologetically, if they were busy or attached). Not a single woman did; most were affronted. “You’ve got to be kidding” was a typical response, as was: “What is wrong with you?”This disparity tacitly underlies “Lost Boys”, a new book by James Bloodworth in which he goes on a “personal journey” through another place where men feel sexually rebuffed: “the manosphere”. He peers into its literature (“Why Women Deserve Less” is a typical title). He listens to its credos (chiefly, that women are “bitches” corrupted by feminism). He helps out on a course costing $10,000, which warns that high-status men will soon be “fucking all the women”. And he observes the manosphere’s anger when, for some mysterious reason, the “bitches” fail to fall for all this. “Rage,” he writes, is “simmering away below the surface.”It is a timely title: the manosphere is big news in the West. Its influence has been detected in everything from “Adolescence”, a Netflix mini-series (“a poignant study”, wrote one commentator) to Andrew Tate (a noxious “mega-influencer” of the manosphere) and the podcasts of Joe Rogan (the “voice of the manosphere”).Quite what the manosphere is is less clear. The term is vague but ominous, sitting somewhere between the comically trivial (the man- prefix hinting, as with “man bag” or “mansplaining”, at a manifestly mockable maleness) and the cosmically big (the -sphere ending implies that, like the troposphere, the manosphere surrounds everyone, as inescapable as air). Certainly it is in everyone’s mouth: according to Google’s N-gram viewer, which tracks the usage of words, “manosphere” has risen 170-fold since 2010.Mr Bloodworth adopts, in part, a historical approach to explaining the manosphere. He sees its origins in “The Game” (2005), a dating manual by Neil Strauss, a journalist. Bound in pleather, decorated with silhouettes of girls with Bond-style breasts and bottoms, “The Game” had chapters with titles such as “STEP 1—SELECT A TARGET”; “STEP 5—ISOLATE THE TARGET”, and the ineffably romantic “STEP 10—BLAST LAST-MINUTE RESISTANCE”. Less a dating manual than a predating one, it set the tone for much of what followed, as it encouraged men to hunt out “SHBs” (“Super Hot Babes”), ideally with “LSE” (“Low Self-Esteem”) so that they could practise “SS” (“Speed Seduction”) on them. It was an instant bestseller.The jargon persisted: any journey through the manosphere is best attempted with a glossary in hand, as you will encounter “incels” (“involuntary celibates”), “PUA” (“Pick-Up Artists”) and, of course, endless references to the “blue pill” and the “red pill”. This particular jargon comes from “The Matrix”, a film of 1999 in which those who take the red pill are able to see the “truth” of society which, in the movie, is that all humans are wired up to strange machines that suck their energy.The “truth” that is understood in the manosphere is that modern society is “gynocentric” and leaves most men metaphorically—but crucially not actually—screwed. And that leads to the other defining trait of the manosphere: anger. “Adolescence” centres on a boy who kills a female classmate. Mr Bloodworth began his book when his editor suggested he should write about “angry men on the internet”.Though quite how many such men there are, or how angry they are, is not clear. The manosphere is referred to as if it were a coherent whole, but there is no good data about the number of its inhabitants, their age or anything else. Any definition of it is sprawling: “a loosely affiliated network of masculinist websites, blogs and online forums” is Mr Bloodworth’s attempt. Views and online followers give some hint of its scale: at one point Mr Tate had 4.6m followers on Instagram. (He was banned from the platform in 2022.) But then a cat called Nala has 4.4m.There is a widespread fear that the manosphere is seeping into the atmosphere of the real world, toxifying it. There are ominous signs: several recent studies in Britain have noted high levels of misogyny among schoolchildren. Alek Minassian, who murdered ten people in Toronto in 2018, did so after posting on Facebook that “The Incel Rebellion has already begun.”Is the manosphere truly dangerous or a moral panic? The author of a recent paper for Ofcom, a British regulator, has said that “society has overestimated” the risk of it. Almost two-thirds of young men in America, Australia and Britain engage with “masculinity influencers”, another study has found. Some of those will spout vile misogyny; others will offer recipes for protein shakes. The manosphere’s homoerotic fascination with oiled, manly muscles is pronounced. “Manosphere”, as Mr Bloodworth has said, is now used to refer to “anyone who can do a bench press”.Arguably the manosphere is both panic and problem. It is better to think about it, says Laura Bates, the author of “The New Age of Sexism”, a book about misogyny and AI, less as a single system than as “an ecosystem”. Like an ecosystem, its inhabitants range from harmless species to more unpleasant predators. (Mr Tate is charged with rape, actual bodily harm and human trafficking, which he denies.) Certain species thrive in this environment: resentful men multiply and women are repelled.Therein lies the tragicomedy of the manosphere. Those who dwell in it feel that they, like the hero in “The Matrix”, have taken the red pill and can see the truth of the world and of women. And so they sit, squandering their energy on machines, talking about women online instead of going out and actually meeting some. The irony is almost—but not quite—amusing. The epigraph of Mr Bloodworth’s book is an apt quotation from C.S. Lewis, a British writer: “Only by being terrible do they avoid being comic.” ■For more on the latest books, films, TV shows, albums and controversies, sign up to Plot Twist, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter