Culture - Was Zbigniew Brzezinski America’s most important foreign-policy guru?

He recognised—and exploited—the weakness of the Soviet Union, a new biography shows. ON THE PAGE, Zbigniew Brzezinski’s fate is always to be compared to Henry Kissinger. It was the same in life. The two men arrived in New York from central Europe under the looming shadow of fascism in 1938, just six weeks apart. In the 1950s both sought a tenured professorship at Harvard. Kissinger became Richard Nixon’s foreign-policy guru and in 1977 Brzezinski took over from him under Jimmy Carter. After his rival died in 2017, Kissinger offered the assessment that, among American national security advisers, Brzezinski would rank among the two greatest strategic thinkers. (No prize for guessing who came first.)Edward Luce’s fine biography of an underappreciated man makes a powerful case for revisiting that judgment. Brzezinski was blessed with a penetrating intelligence and remarkable foresight. Kissinger got Nixon to China, but in 1977 Brzezinski got Carter to Poland. It was part of a brilliant, sustained campaign that led, 14 years later, to the peaceful dissolution of the Warsaw Pact and the Soviet Union.Brzezinski’s insight was that the Soviet Union was the Russian empire dressed up in a commissar’s uniform. Many American Kremlinologists focused exclusively on Moscow. They theorised that the Soviet Union had become a monolith, a communist mirror image of their own great country. Brzezinski’s devastating retort—“So do they speak Soviet?”—captures a conviction that dated back to his master’s thesis. Russia’s colonial possessions yearned for their freedom, he insisted, and they always would. To others, Moscow’s domination of the Soviet space and the Warsaw Pact countries was its strength. Brzezinski grasped that it was a fatal weakness.In office and after Brzezinski cultivated anti-Soviet forces, especially in the country of his birth, Poland. In this, he was greatly helped by his friendship with Karol Wojtyla, a Pole who became Pope John Paul II in 1978. Carter, a deeply religious man, delighted Brzezinski by allowing him to go to John Paul’s inauguration. The two men talked politics—indeed, Brzezinski sometimes felt as if Carter were the priest and the pope the president.Brzezinski tirelessly supported Polish nationalists. He played a central role in determining that their movement eroded Soviet hegemony without provoking an armed crackdown, as it had in Hungary in 1956 and Czechoslovakia in 1968. He counselled restraint within the freedom movement, but also informed the Kremlin that Carter, unlike previous presidents, would not turn a blind eye to an invasion.Brzezinski further tightened the screws by picking up where Kissinger had left off, persuading Carter to normalise relations with China. The Soviet leadership’s feeling of isolation seemed to curb their behaviour. And after Russians invaded Afghanistan in 1979, he financed the mujahideen insurgency which, over the next decade, weakened the Kremlin.As the sun went down on the Soviet Union, Brzezinski’s reward was to be treated in Poland as a national hero. More surprising was a visit to Moscow in 1989. Addressing the foreign service’s Diplomatic Academy, Brzezinski was his usual uncompromising self, laying out the need for a market economy, democracy and a loose federation of republics. When he finished he was met with raucous applause. To the Americans in the room, that moment marked the cold war’s end.The question of why Brzezinski’s accomplishments are not more recognised has many answers. Kissinger was deceitful and charming; Brzezinski honest and too often rude. One was a brilliant self-publicist; the other had no time for Washington games. Nobody ever doubted who commanded Kissinger’s loyalty: himself. Brzezinski was thought by the WASP establishment to be putting Poland first. Whenever Carter was critical of Israel—and tensions were high in the lead-up to the Camp David Accords between Egypt and Israel in 1978—Brzezinski was accused of antisemitism, a charge this book refutes.But the main reason is that Carter’s presidency was overshadowed by the mishandling of the Iranian revolution in 1979 and the hostage-taking that blighted his last year in office. Mr Luce argues that, in the run up to the revolution, Brzezinski’s advice was ignored. That does not quite wash: on other matters he was usually able to bulldoze the State Department aside. The Iranians delayed the release of the hostages until five minutes after Ronald Reagan took office. This ensured Reagan got the credit—just as he did for the collapse of the Soviet Union.Neither Brzezinski nor Kissinger ever served in government again, but both retained a taste for power. During the presidential campaign, Kissinger had sought to ingratiate himself with Reagan by blaming the mess in Iran on Carter’s preference for human rights. When he heard of Kissinger’s muck-spreading, Brzezinski’s mordant retort was typical: “I conclude that, although power corrupts, the absence of power corrupts absolutely.” ■For more on the latest books, films, TV shows, albums and controversies, sign up to Plot Twist, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter