Culture - The right to privacy has been hard-earned. It is imperilled again

A new book shows how the idea of a private sphere took shape over centuries. “A PRIVATE MAN has alwaies the liberty (because thought is free,) to beleeve, or not to beleeve, in his heart,” wrote Thomas Hobbes in 1651. (It was so radical a view that the philosopher did not feel free to express it in England, and published from France.) In 1654 Susan Bounty gave birth and was hanged for adultery. In 1835 James Pratt and John Smith were executed for the crime of homosexuality.Today what people believe about religion, or get up to in the bedroom, is considered their own business. For centuries, however, saying or doing the wrong thing could get you put to death. This changed as the idea of a private domain—as distinct from the public sphere—took shape. A fascinating new book lays out how thinking about privacy has evolved.The ancient Greeks distinguished between the polis (community) and oikos (household), but the idea of privacy as it is known today did not exist. Indeed, the word “privacy” comes from the Latin privatus, which in certain forms means “to be deprived”—notably of public office. To be privatus was not a good thing, for it meant you had been stripped of your rank.Until the late Middle Ages, life was lived in an open way, in close proximity to others. A closed-off domain was where sex, sin and sloth lurked. “The murderer and the adulterer are alike desirous of privacy,” warned an English preacher as late as the 17th century.This attitude began to change, albeit slowly. People started talking about private property in the 1500s, then private affairs. Thinkers such as John Locke argued that people should be able to hold beliefs without punishment. The Protestant Reformation held that it was the individual’s relationship with God and scripture, rather than the public institution of the church, that was of paramount importance. There was an increased emphasis on what Christopher St Germain, a 16th-century jurist, called “inward things”.In time, governments went from interfering in the private domain to protecting it. This is examined via an incident involving Britain’s postal service in the 19th century. With home letter-delivery came an expectation of privacy. But when an Italian revolutionary living in London discovered that his missives were subject to snooping, it caused national outrage. Thomas Carlyle, an essayist, said it was a “disgraceful affair”. Charles Dickens wrote messages on the backs of envelopes, goading the nosy posties who might unseal them. “Secret interception of letters amounted to treason against the public trust,” Tiffany Jenkins writes, “undermining the very essence of democratic governance.”A key turning-point in the evolution of the private sphere, she argues, was the publication of an influential article in the Harvard Law Review in 1890. The authors of “The Right to Privacy” stated that technology—notably photography and newspapers—could invade “the sacred precincts of private and domestic life”. Ordinary people, they felt, should be protected against the emotional harm that would be caused by unwanted intrusions from shutterbugs or scribblers. They enshrined the idea of “the right to be let alone”. This put forward privacy as a value for states around the world to uphold.In particular, privacy law was brought to bear on matters of sex. In the second half of the 20th century, privacy was the basis of legal arguments for tolerating homosexuality and prostitution. In America the Supreme Court found a right to privacy in the “penumbra” of the constitution, and cited it to strike down state abortion bans in Roe v Wade in 1973. When the court reversed itself half a century later, it did so on the basis that privacy is not mentioned in the constitution.Today the future of the private sphere is in jeopardy—and not just from judges. Social media allow the vain to share every aspect of their lives. Governments are increasingly keen on monitoring their citizens. Artificial intelligence relies on troves of data. There is a tension between privacy and utility: the protection of personal information comes at a loss to society since the agglomeration of data, such as health or geolocation records, can lead to innovations that benefit everyone.Sadly, the author does not tackle this conundrum, one of the book’s few shortcomings. It would have been stronger, too, with more examples from outside Britain, be it mail censorship in America or spying in France’s royal court. Yet this is one of those rare works that changes how you see the world, with an insight on every page. ■For more on the latest books, films, TV shows, albums and controversies, sign up to Plot Twist, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter