Obituary - Brian Wilson attracted a fame he could hardly endure

The creative mind behind the Beach Boys died on June 11th, aged 82. He was not exactly sure when they began. But he had just taken his first trip on acid; mid-1960s then, so he was in his early 20s. After it he found himself at the piano, playing the same riff over and over. About an hour passed like that. Then, magically, it became a chorus: “I wish they all could be California girls.” That song became one of the Beach Boys’ best. But it was after this miracle that the Voices began to occupy his head, and never left.Only some were familiar, yet all of them seemed familiar with him. Their remarks were always negative. Your music is no damned good, Brian. Get to work, Brian. No one wants your stuff, Brian. Then, sometimes, much scarier: We’re coming for you, Brian.The strangest part was that the Beach Boys were then on the crest of a wave. They had made ten studio albums in three years and, after the Beatles and the Stones, were the biggest band in the world. A string of hits, starting with “Surfin’ USA” and “Surfer Girl” in 1963, had climbed to the top or near-top of the American charts. Their songs summed up a paradise: perpetual summer, golden beaches, huge rolling surf, cold beer, hot rods and endlessly available girls. Most of these he had written and produced himself, as well as playing bass guitar and singing falsetto. No such multi-tasker had appeared on the pop/rock scene before. His intricate harmonies, laid over rock rhythms, were catchy and carefree and new. His music made people happy, and he meant it to.In public he seemed happy too, at first. He grinned with the others—his brother Carl and friend Al Jardine on guitars, his brother Dennis on drums, his cousin Mike Love doing the vocals—as they posed for publicity photos carrying surfboards to the beach. But he was already troubled. The whole surf thing was a con, Dennis’s craze; he had tried it only once, been conked on the head, and that was it. His pale skin burned in the sun. More seriously, fame was a burden, and live shows an ordeal.In 1965 he decided just to write the songs and produce, not perform. He would be the hideaway teenager of “In My Room”, but also a studio visionary. The songs, especially on the album “Pet Sounds” in 1966, were classics: “Wouldn’t It Be Nice”, “God Only Knows”, “Sloop John B.” As he ventured into darker and yet more complex territory, people called him a genius, which weighed on him. In the same year “Good Vibrations”, with a whistling electro-theremin, jaw-harp and sleighbells, took more than 80 hours of tape, seven months and $50,000. It became the band’s top-selling single. But the Voices were not impressed. You’re falling behind, Brian. Do you think you’re Phil Spector, Brian? You’re never going to top “You’ve Lost That Lovin’ Feeling”, so don’t even try.Phil Spector’s walls of sound did indeed haunt him. In the 1970s and 1980s, when depression engulfed him and, in 1982, the Beach Boys fired him, he would stay in bed all day, listening to “Be My Baby” and snorting cocaine. So Motown pulsed in his head too, as well as Chuck Berry’s boogie-woogie, Rosemary Clooney’s “Tenderly” (heard when he was ten), Gershwin’s “Rhapsody in Blue” (heard at two) and whatever his friendly rivals the Beatles were doing. Among all this his own music shimmered in glimpses, like goldfish. He spent 38 years trying sporadically to assemble his “teenage symphony to God”, already called “Smile”. He longed to astonish the world with it, though the Voices mocked: You got any guts? It’s not good enough, Brian. When at last in 2004, in London, he felt confident enough to perform it, now with a piano and a small orchestra, the standing ovation lasted ten minutes.Much of his perfectionism came from his father, a pushy lathe salesman who would pummel his son’s chest to make a point, or pop out his glass eye to make him stare into the empty socket. He had tried a career in music himself, hadn’t got far, and now pressed his offspring to try. Pressing didn’t just mean buying an upright piano. It meant screaming, as he shoved him into the recording studio: Don’t be a pussy! Surge! Get in there and kick ass! All he could respond was “OK, Dad.” His father’s anger was intolerable but, without that particular Voice, he might never have made music his life. He would have been nothing.He had heard him in mono. His right ear was deaf from childhood, after a boy hit him with a length of iron pipe. When it came to music, he heard a melody that had already been mixed down. His technique was to pile new layers on existing layers, repeatedly overdubbing, as he had first learned to do on a reel-to-reel tape recorder. Many folk said his songs got gradually sadder, but he didn’t think so. He was sure he made them more beautiful. In this way he could begin to reproduce the celestial sounds in his head.Dealing with the Voices was much harder. Ignoring them didn’t work; nor did jokes, Klonopin or the fervent praise of Bob Dylan and Paul McCartney. In 1975 his brothers hired a bizarre psychiatric therapist, Eugene Landy, to sort out his depression and reduce his ballooning weight. Landy was another screaming tyrant who padlocked the fridge, doused him in cold water, monitored his friends, charged $35,000 a month and seized for himself the roles of business partner and executive producer. What he failed to do before, in 1992, he was barred from all contact, was make the Voices go away.They were there to stay. The only answer was to exert his willpower (”Wilson power”) and defy them. He could do so by going on performing, and did so until 2022. His second wife Melinda convinced him that though the Voices said they would kill him, they had said that for years without doing it. He had almost killed himself; but she had saved him from that, as had his grown-up daughters and his five adopted children. Love was the strategy that worked. And not just with family, but with people in general: with the audiences who, as he launched his now-raspy voice into “God Only Knows” or “California Girls” felt bathed again in joy and sunshine, and broke into rapturous applause. ■