Leaders - The plan to protect America by shooting down missiles mid-air

It’s not as outlandish as it sounds. IN THE 1980S scientists working on Ronald Reagan’s Strategic Defence Initiative proposed what seemed like a madcap scheme to defend America. Thousands of interceptor satellites would orbit Earth and attack enemy missiles as they took off. The idea fizzled out. It has been resuscitated by Donald Trump, who on May 20th said that his Golden Dome missile-defence shield would cost $175bn in total, take two to three years to complete and offer “close to 100%” protection.Mr Trump’s vision sounds just as fantastical as Reagan’s.  “We call it super technology,” he declared. “Nobody else has it.” But in essence, the Golden Dome is not as outlandish as it might once have been. In fact, done well, it could become a useful part of America’s defensive arsenal.In the 1980s putting sensors into space and building miniature computers to sit inside thousands of interceptors was very expensive. Now, thanks in part to Elon Musk and his company SpaceX, launch costs have fallen dramatically. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO), a non-partisan think-tank, estimates that the cost of developing a constellation that could defeat one to two intercontinental-range ballistic missiles (ICBMs) has fallen by 30% to 40% compared with estimates in 2004 and 2012.The Golden Dome idea also promises to be more useful—which is why the Biden administration began work on the space-based sensors that would track cruise missiles and the digital pipes that pass tracking data from satellite to satellite. America’s adversaries increasingly wield missiles that can take more circuitous routes to the continental United States, circumventing the radars and interceptors designed for attacks coming over the polar region. In addition, the threat to America used to come solely from nuclear-armed missiles. It now includes non-nuclear conventional missiles that might target ports, air bases and other military infrastructure.Inevitably, Mr Trump’s claims are exaggerated. No missile-defence system will ever offer blanket protection. America would need 36,000 space-based interceptors to defeat just ten North Korean ICBMs, allowing for 30 seconds of decision time, according to the American Physical Society, a group of physicists. Countering larger salvoes from Russia and China, and covering every corner of American soil, would cause those numbers to mushroom. So, too, would the cost. Even a modest shield, designed to parry a couple of ICBMs, could cost $161bn-542bn over 20 years. That is an enormous sum at a time when the modernisation of nuclear forces is also expected to demand $946bn by 2035.In practice, Mr Trump should be more modest in his ambitions—and not only because of the cost. In his executive order in January, he demanded a system that could defend against any foreign aerial attack. In his announcement this week, he promised that cruise, ballistic and hypersonic missiles would all be destroyed. If so, it would be destabilising. Fearing that their nuclear deterrent forces might become ineffective, China and Russia would seek to expand their arsenals—in China’s case even faster than today—or to build weapons that would give American leaders even less warning time.In reality, some Russian and Chinese nuclear-armed ICBMs would always get through. However, that does not mean homeland missile defence is pointless. In recent years, Israel, Ukraine and India have all shown how blocking even a modest share of incoming projectiles can limit the damage and buy some decision-making time for political leaders— who might otherwise feel compelled to fire back at once. ■Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.