Letters - Poland and the threat from Russia

Also this week, the Church of England, adventures in Sudan, Canada, IT projects, clean air. Letters are welcome via e-mail to letters@economist.comFind out more about how we process your letterYou underscored the urgency of European resolve in the face of the threat from Russia (“What Putin wants”, May 10th). Yet you mistook realism for extremism when criticising Poland and the Baltic states for taking the Russian threat “to the other extreme”. It is not Poland that lends weight to Vladimir Putin’s propaganda, rather it is appeasement, dressed up as nuance. In 2022, when Russia invaded Ukraine, European leaders said they should have listened to the Poles. We would rather not have that same bitter satisfaction twice. History has taught us not to confuse a dictator’s age with his appetite, nor to build detente on the ruins of other countries’ sovereignty.If Mr Putin’s war is ideological, as you admit, then so too must be Europe’s defence. It should not be rooted in wishful thinking, but in moral clarity and strategic spine. Poland does not fear shadows, it recognises patterns.Piotr WilczekAmbassador of PolandLondonThe perspective of the Baltic states has been shaped by history, geography and experience, and has a clear understanding of authoritarian ambitions. If we are to be labelled extremists, let it be for recognising early the true nature of the Kremlin’s intentions and for taking the necessary steps to defend our people, our values and our democratic way of life.It is not the principled position of the Baltic states that has hardened NATO’s posture. It is Russia’s consistent destructive behaviour.Events over the past decade have shown that the real failure has not been excessive vigilance, but the lack of it. Were more countries as “extreme” in their assessments and actions, perhaps neither Ukraine nor the rest of Europe would be facing the threats we see today.Lina ZigmantaiteChargée d’affairesEmbassy of LithuaniaLondonI am happy to say that your vivid picture of the apparent decline of the Church of England is not borne out by the facts (“Churchgoing, going …gone?”, May 10th). Although there is always real sadness when a church closes, it is a tribute to the dedication of clergy and an army of passionate volunteers that we can maintain our commitment to being a Christian presence in every community. In fact, closure is relatively rare in the Church of England. In the past 11 years 197 consecrated places of worship closed. This is out of 16,000 church buildings. And this takes no account of new congregations launched or once-closed churches that have reopened.In my own diocese I think of The Well church in north Swindon, a new congregation which had been meeting in a school hall but has just moved into a new building. And on the former airfield at Filton in Bristol where supersonic jets were developed, we have established a new church for the new population, Concord church.In fact across the country, the numbers in the pews have grown for each of the past four years and the number of people who are part of a local Church of England congregation stands at over a million once again. Far from the gloomy picture portrayed, I see a much more hopeful one.Rt Revd Vivienne FaullLead bishop for Church of England buildings and Bishop of BristolYour article on the old White Nile ferry rekindled memories of my trip from Juba to Kosti in 1971 (“Sunken and rusting”, May 3rd). The ferry consisted of a classic river steamer with houseboats lashed all round to maximise the number of passengers. This made for a bulky journey, especially near Juba where the river was narrower. We crashed from bank to bank, mostly as a clumsy means of making a bend. After a couple of days we entered the Sudd, considered to be Earth’s largest swamp, which Sir Samuel Baker, an explorer, called “a veritable Styx”. Yet our experienced captain could pilot us downriver at night with just a searchlight to remind him of the main channel.On the upper deck I observed crocodiles and spectacular sky-filling displays of lightning. CHASE UNTERMEYERHoustonYou noted Mark Carney’s plans to jump start Canada’s economy by lowering taxes, slashing red tape and investing in infrastructure (“To govern in econometrics”, May 3rd). What goes unmentioned is that the new prime minister also intends to run substantial budget deficits that over the next three years are projected to be higher than under Justin Trudeau.Mr Carney proposes an “operating” budget for ongoing costs and a “capital” budget for so-called investments. But these investments will be financed by borrowing, adding to the debt burden that younger Canadians like myself and my infant son will bear for decades. Deficits also risk fuelling inflation at a time when restraint is needed, not stimulus.Mr Carney likes to say “elbows up”, a term he has borrowed from ice hockey. Canadians might prefer he kept his elbows down, and his spending too.Sahil ChhabraTecumseh, CanadaBartleby is right that IT projects would do better if they were less bespoke (May 10th). But he is wrong to think they would also improve if more time was spent on planning. When people think they should have spent more time planning their IT project what they really mean is: “I wish I knew then what I know now”. It won’t fix the problem. People mean different things when they discuss this. And a multi-year plan simply can’t predict how tech will evolve during the lifetime of your project. In Mike Tyson’s phrase, everyone has a plan until they get punched in the face.The broader tech industry has worked out that the best way to manage IT projects is to have a plan, to accept that the plan is likely to be wrong and therefore work to get your tech out in front of selected users quickly. Then take the punch in the face that your customers will inevitably give you with good grace and use what you learned to adapt the plan.Large IT projects with extensive planning phases are doomed to underperform their more agile alternatives. A more iterative approach stands a greater chance of success.Alan BuxtonRickmansworth, HertfordshireWhen an architect designs a skyscraper she knows in advance where she’d like to put the elevators and the heating and ventilation. The whole building can be shown on a sheet of paper and built accordingly.Software application designers enjoy no such luxury. Managers and end users really have no idea what they’re actually going to want a new application to do until they start seeing it do something new or differently. And then come the four most expensive words in project management: “While you’re at it…”Tom ShortSan Rafael, CaliforniaThe terminology in IT is revealing. The customer is a “user”. But the users really do not know what they want nor do they have the ability or skills to lay out their specifications clearly. No one fully understands the existing systems or the ramifications of any changes, let alone all of the business rules being implemented. Of course, the new head of IT always knows best and that the previous head was useless.And then there is the wonder of estimating timelines. Many, many times I was asked to come up with a quick “no binding” estimate. I would always pause and think out aloud, “Hmmm, let me see, how long will it take me to do something I have never done before.”Douglas MustainePaarl, South AfricaAsking a software expert to estimate the cost of a project is akin to asking Shakespeare how long it will take to write “Romeo and Juliet”. There is no answer until it’s done.Tim MorrisHutton Magna, DurhamBartleby associated the success or failure of IT projects with British football teams (Spurs equalled disappointment, for example). The column should have been delayed to include a reference to projects that exceed expectations. After their FA Cup Final win on May 17th, Crystal Palace would have been the perfect example.David MeaderSydney“How dirty are electric vehicles?”, you asked (April 19th). I am reminded of the quote from Lee Iacocca when he was at Ford: “How much clean air do we need?”James WoosterLake Tapps, Washington