The world this week - Business

Britain’s consumer prices soared by 1.2% in April, pushing the annual rate of inflation to 3.5%. One factor behind the jump was a more than 26% rise in water utility bills. Households also felt the pinch from higher energy costs. Rachel Reeves, the chancellor of the exchequer, described the figures as “clearly disappointing”. Traders pared their bets on further interest-rate cuts from the Bank of England. America’s Senate moved a bill forward that would create the first regulatory framework for stablecoins, digital currencies that are tied to the value of an asset, usually the dollar. The Democrats had initially blocked the bill over concerns about consumer protections, but in the end enough of them joined Republicans on a procedural vote to advance the legislation to its final stage.An outage of Bloomberg’s terminals affected markets for 90 minutes. The terminals are widely used in financial trading and carry data on live pricing. Users pay around $28,000 a year for each terminal.Novo Nordisk announced that its chief executive was stepping down. Investors have expressed concerns that the pharmaceutical giant is losing its competitive edge in the weight-loss market to rivals such as Eli Lilly. Novo Nordisk makes the Ozempic and Wegovy drugs. Its share price has slimmed down by 30% this year.CATL made a successful debut on the Hong Kong stock exchange, with its share price rising by 16% on the first day of trading. The Chinese maker of electric-car batteries raised $4.6bn, which could rise to $5.3bn if the underwriting banks exercise their options. It is the biggest stock offering in the world so far this year, and the second listing for CATL, which first went public in Shenzhen in 2018.Honda became the latest carmaker to cut back its investment in pure electric vehicles because of slowing demand. It also scrapped a target to achieve 30% of its sales in EVs by 2030. The Japanese company is instead ramping up its forecasts for sales of hybrid vehicles.The member countries of the World Health Organisation formally adopted the first ever pandemic agreement, which sets out the tools to combat a global outbreak of disease, including the sharing of vaccines. Once an annex covering data-sharing is agreed on the treaty will be sent to member states for ratification.In an announcement that could potentially undermine its partnership with OpenAI, Microsoft said that it would add Grok’s artificial-intelligence models to its Azure cloud-computing platform for developers. Grok is a generative AI created by Elon Musk’s startup, xAI, a potential rival to OpenAI. Microsoft is OpenAI’s biggest investor and has integrated its models with Azure. But it wants to add other models to the platform so that it eventually becomes the dominant hub for developers.OpenAI shrugged off the news from Microsoft by announcing it was buying IO in a $6.5bn deal. IO is a startup founded by Sir Jony Ive, best known for his work on designing Apple’s iPhone. OpenAI will work with Sir Jony’s team to develop new devices built specifically for AI technology. We can “completely reimagine what it means to use a computer”, said Sam Altman, OpenAI’s boss.In Spain the backlash against mass tourism continued apace, as the government ordered Airbnb to take 66,000 rental listings off its website for breaking various regulations, such as not identifying whether the property is owned by a person or a company. A court in Madrid agreed that 5,000 listings must be removed immediately. Protests have been held across Spain claiming that holiday rentals are making local housing unaffordable.A recent cyber-attack on Marks & Spencer could cost the company £300m ($400m) in profit, it said, and operations won’t return to normal until July. The British retailer’s digital logistics system has been crippled, forcing staff to use pen and paper to replenish its shelves. M&S insists that it has not underinvested in its cyber-security systems and that the incident was a result of human error. It has not said whether it paid the attackers a ransom.Home Depot bucked a trend among big American retailers and pledged not to raise prices in response to higher tariffs. Around half the goods that the DIY chain sells are produced in America and so it is less exposed to the duties than other companies. Target cut its sales forecast but said that raising prices because of tariffs would be a “last resort”. Donald Trump recently told Walmart to “EAT THE TARIFFS” after it suggested it would have to increase prices. “I’ll be watching,” he said ominously.