Asia - America’s new ship-killer missiles come to the Philippines

US Marines are training to defend Taiwan in a new way. On April 22nd a Chinese aircraft-carrier strike group sailed within three nautical miles of the Philippines’ northernmost islands. It was an unusual show of force. China’s reason for sabre-rattling was clear: in late April, America flew a new short-range missile system to Basco, in the Batanes island chain, for the first time.The system’s deployment was the most important addition to annual military exercises held by America and the Philippines. The director of the exercise, Brigadier General Michael Logico of the Philippine army, was on hand as the missile system was deployed. “I always see this as a positive, when China reacts to us. It only means that we have probably done something worthy of their attention,” he says.The airfield at Basco is a short, gently sloping runway on a mountainous postage stamp of an island. But the Batanes are key terrain, the closest that America can get to Taiwan on the territory of an ally. And it is here that the United States Marine Corps is rehearsing for the first time a new way of defending Taiwan, in the hope that it will deter China from ever attempting to seize the self-governing island by force.At the centre of the new strategy is the Navy Marine Expeditionary Ship Interdiction System (NMESIS). The missile system is not the hardest-hitting weapon in America’s arsenal. But it is small, light, easy to move and hard to find. Mounted on the back of a modified and remote-controlled version of the Humvee, it can hide in the steep emerald hills of the Batanes.In last month’s exercise America spread its marines throughout the Batanes, as it might do if it feared a Chinese attack on Taiwan. In that scenario, marines would be in place to fire NMESIS at Chinese vessels in waters south of Taiwan, or even those landing on its southern beaches. In doing so, they could block Chinese ships from breaking out beyond what strategists call the first island chain, the long archipelago extending from Japan to Taiwan to the Philippines to Borneo. Such an approach would limit China’s options in an invasion or blockade, and allow America to surge forces into the Western Pacific without having to fight its way in.The marines in the Batanes know that they will be vulnerable to China’s own missiles. That is why a big part of their mission is to remain undetected before firing. Even if China were to take out some of the batteries on the islands, it could not be confident that it had got all of them. “Chinese military planners do not like uncertainty,” says T.X. Hammes, a retired colonel at the National Defence University in Washington. Small units like these “create uncertainty because they are mobile”.To deter an attack on Taiwan, American war-planners are focusing on creating uncertainty throughout the Western Pacific. Each of America’s armed services is studying how they can spread their forces out so as to survive an onslaught. For each service, it is a big shift, requiring an overhaul of their doctrine and equipment. The strategy is not without its challenges. First, there are questions about whether China could detect signals from the marines’ electronics, allowing it to take them out before they get a shot off. “Our electromagnetic signature is very low,” says Colonel John Lehane, the commander of the 3rd Marine Littoral Regiment, which brought NMESIS to the Batanes. Keeping it that way will require constant updates.Mobility is another work in progress. The marines’ strategy sees them moving from island to island, dodging missiles, in a smaller and faster new vessel called the light amphibious warship. But shipbuilding delays in America mean that none has yet been built. For now, moving NMESIS around requires hitching a ride on older, larger amphibious ships or C-130 aircraft based at vulnerable airfields. Colonel Hammes questions whether the Batanes are where the marines should be. The islands are closer to Taiwan than Luzon, the Philippines’ biggest island. But they are small, which might make it easier for China to find marines on them. Better, he says, to stay on Luzon, with more places to hide. That would require longer-range missiles. The marines are working on firing Tomahawk cruise missiles from the same chassis as NMESIS, which would increase its range from 185km to over 1,600km.Then there’s the question of politics. The marines’ strategy relies upon access to the territory of allies such as Japan and the Philippines. It also assumes that their supply lines would be cut early in a conflict, and that they might need to rely on the support of the local community. America remains popular in the Philippines, its former colony. But many local officials in the northern Philippines are unhappy about the American military presence, fearing that they will get caught in the crossfire.The pro-American president, Ferdinand Marcos junior, is term-limited, so he cannot run in the next presidential election in 2028. His vice-president, Sara Duterte, is the frontrunner. Mr Marcos and Ms Duterte fell out shortly after taking office, and he had been seeking to oust her in a trial in the nation’s Senate. But in midterm elections on May 12th, voters denied Mr Marcos the two-thirds majority required to remove her.Ms Duterte is the daughter of Rodrigo Duterte, who as president from 2016 to 2022 limited the Philippines’ military co-operation with America and cosied up to China. Her father is now awaiting trial at The Hague on charges of crimes against humanity committed in a brutal drug war during his presidency. But if Ms Duterte wins the same office, she could reorient the Philippines’ foreign policy yet again.There remain doubts, too, about Donald Trump’s willingness to defend Taiwan and allies like the Philippines. But the marines are focused on honing their craft, not politics. “The more we do it, the better we get at it,” says Lieutenant General Michael Cederholm, who heads the marines’ largest combat formation, while flying back from observing the deployment of NMESIS in the Batanes. “And today we got a little better and a little stronger.” ■