Europe - MAGA misses the mark in Romania

A liberal wins the presidential race. NICUSOR DAN’S victory in Romania’s presidential election on May 18th afforded the country’s liberals a rare moment of joy. Mr Dan, the mayor of Bucharest, is a French-trained mathematician known for fighting corruption. His rival, George Simion, a MAGA-friendly nationalist, had been favoured to win after taking 41% of the vote in the election’s first round to Mr Dan’s 21%. Mr Simion had cosied up to Hungary’s Viktor Orban; denounced Ursula von der Leyen, president of the European Commission; and pledged to end aid to Ukraine. Romania seemed poised to join the club of countries that are driving a populist wedge into the European Union.Yet in the two weeks between the first and second rounds, the Bucharest mayor ran the better campaign. He was widely agreed to have won the sole head-to-head debate, demanding that Mr Simion, who had vaguely promised to cut half a million state employees, explain whom he would fire. Mr Simion unwisely skipped several other debates. Romania’s diaspora of over 4m citizens (compared with 19m inside the country), which overwhelmingly backed Mr Simion in the first round, split more evenly in the second. Overall turnout hit a record for a presidential election. The second round’s new voters favoured Mr Dan, who won by a solid 54% to 46%.That will make a huge difference. Since the previous prime minister resigned after Mr Simion’s first-round victory, the new president gets to choose a new one. Had Mr Simion won, his hard-right Alliance for the Union of Romanians (AUR) would have formed a government. Instead, whoever Mr Dan picks will form a coalition including the Save Romania Union (USR), an anti-corruption party he once headed, and the centre-right National Liberals (PNL), one of two main parties of power. The other, the centre-left Social Democrats (PSD), could join too.The presence in government of one or both of the big parties will complicate one of Mr Dan’s tasks: convincing Romanians that he does not represent more of the same. Both Mr Simion and Mr Dan were seen as anti-system candidates, appealing to citizens exhausted by corruption. In the 2010s Romania carried out one of Europe’s most aggressive anti-corruption campaigns, jailing thousands of officials. But by the time of the pandemic the momentum had run out; investigations were weaponised to undermine political opponents. Since 2021 the PNL and PSD have run the country in grand coalitions that were seen as denying voters a choice.That no presidential candidate from either party made it into the second round showed how deep the disaffection runs. Indeed, that was clear after Romania’s initial attempt to choose a president last November. The country’s constitutional court annulled that election after it was unexpectedly won by Calin Georgescu, an eccentric far-right conspiracy theorist. Mr Georgescu had implausibly declared zero campaign expenditures, and there was evidence of social-media manipulation; some alleged Russia was involved.The cancellation undermined many Romanians’ trust in the electoral system. Mr Simion has now undermined it further. After first accepting Mr Dan’s win, he reversed himself on May 20th, alleging interference by France and Moldova. Mr Simion has long campaigned for Romania to absorb Moldova, where most citizens speak Romanian, and is banned from that country as a result, but its alleged interference was vague. As for the other charge, Pavel Durov, the founder of Telegram, a social-media app, stated that a French intelligence official had asked him to suppress some messaging that favoured Mr Simion. He said he had refused, which seemed to render interference on that platform moot. Romania’s electoral authority quickly waved off Mr Simion’s challenge.The new government will face a harsh economic picture. Romania’s budget deficit was the highest in the EU last year, at 9% of GDP. Inflation is at 5.1%, driven up by the previous government, which raised pensions and state salaries in failed efforts to court popularity. The country’s credit rating is BBB-, just above junk status. To keep it from falling further the government will need to cut spending and raise taxes.Liberals across Europe are now looking to Romania for lessons on how to beat populists. But Mr Simion made gratuitous errors. His courting of Mr Orban, aimed at winning over ethnic Hungarians, was quixotic: he has a firm reputation as an anti-Hungarian chauvinist. Mr Orban’s endorsement prompted a denunciation from Romania’s ethnic-Hungarian party, and probably did more harm than good.Mr Dan’s powers as president are limited. He is already trying to broker a deal to cut the budget deficit, and will do what he can to reinvigorate the fight against corruption. “He is extremely competent,” says Alina Mungiu-Pippidi, a corruption expert at Luiss University in Rome who has worked with him. But he will have his work cut out for him. ■To stay on top of the biggest European stories, sign up to Café Europa, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.