Britain - London has become a cycling city

It shows how dockless-electric bikes could transform cities. For the past quarter of a century the City of London Corporation, a local authority, has conducted a giant traffic survey. Stationed around central London, more than a hundred observers stand and count what goes by. The latest exercise, conducted last autumn and published in April, contained the most remarkable result yet. Compared with the previous one two years before, the number of cyclists was up by 57%.London has become a cycling city. For years that dream—of Amsterdam- or Copenhagen-on-Thames—seemed unattainable, owing to long commutes, dangerous roads and a cycling culture dominated by macho MAMILs (middle-aged men in lycra) that would-be riders seemed to find, curiously, unappealing. Even as the city’s mayors installed hundreds of miles of cycleways, particularly since 2016, there was only a slow conversion from seat to saddle.Until now. In central London, the survey shows, bikes have overtaken cars to become the most common vehicle. On current trends, they will outnumber all motor vehicles—cars, buses, motorbikes, vans and lorries—within two years (see chart). Will Norman, the cycling commissioner, reckons the city has reached a tipping-point, with much of the surge coming from people who had not previously been persuaded to pedal.What changed? Most riders still use personal bikes, which account for 60% of the increase since 2022 (helped by all those cycle lanes). But in the past two years the use of rental-electric bikes has increased four-fold. So ubiquitous are a whizzy white-and-green variety that the fruit they are named after has become a verb: “Shall we Lime?” Londoners ask. The Californian company behind them has more than 200,000 bikes in 280 cities, from Paris to San Francisco. But London’s is by far its most extensive service, with some 30,000 bikes across 480 square kilometres and 17 boroughs. (Forest, a British company and Lime’s main competitor, operates in 14.)London’s bike boom offers several lessons. The first is that while many people enjoy the thrill and convenience of cycling, some dislike the effort. London introduced docked bikes in 2010. It has had electric bikes for hire since 2011. But usage took off with the introduction of Lime’s powerful Gen4 bike in 2022. All rental-electric bikes have a top speed of 25kph. But Limes have rapid acceleration, enabling riders to zip around with little exertion.If one secret is making the bikes really electric, the other seems to be making them really dockless. Previously, bike-hire schemes offered a patchy service: it was often hard to find a bike and it could take ages to find a designated parking space. Today, London’s operators have more bikes. But critically they have negotiated relaxed parking rules, including on residential streets, meaning their fleets fan out widely. Lime claims that 97% of Londoners in its service area live within a two-minute walk of one of their bikes. As with Uber, it thinks users open the app if they know convenience is only a few minutes away.There have been teething problems. It is hard to ensure that riders park considerately, not in the middle of the pavement. In the city centre, there are now tightly enforced parking zones, though this can lead to bikes clustered like a shoal. In the rest of the city, operators try to enforce good behaviour by making riders take photos. With more investment in cycle parking, cities should be able to solve this (around ten bikes fit into each car space).A second concern is safety. With large electric motors and a sturdy vandal-proof design, Limes are around four times the weight of an average bike. That makes them easy to tip over. Electric-bike riders tend not to wear helmets and seem especially likely to run traffic lights, perhaps because they are paying by the minute. London’s orthopaedic surgeons complain about a spurt of broken bones. Some critics are calling for tighter regulation.Still, moving people from cars onto bikes helps make cities more liveable. And a truly city-spanning bike-hire scheme—of which London is now perhaps the leading example—offers extra benefits. It is a highly efficient way of filling gaps in an urban-transport system, connecting areas poorly served by buses and trains. City administrators lose some fare revenue, but they benefit from less pressure at peak times, and they can charge bike operators a service fee for their licence.In commuting hours, Lime’s data show that many riders use the bikes for first- or last-mile trips: getting to the nearest Tube or from a railway station to the office. For many, this shaves a third or more off their commute. Not only does that give people time back, it expands the pool of workers a company might be able to hire. Economists have not yet properly studied these benefits, but they could well be large. Previous research found that installing docking points raised rents in nearby houses.Regulation will have to make sure there are sensible parking rules and bikes are well maintained. Cities will also want to foster competition. At around £7 ($6.40) an hour Liming is quite pricey. This month Voi, a Swedish operator, launched a lower-priced scheme in west London. Regulators will need to get the balance right. With a higher usage rate, operators can invest in maintaining their fleet and moving bikes around. Three or four city-wide operators might be ideal; too many would probably result in piles of bikes in the city centre.Lime, which aims to float on the New York Stock Exchange this year, is talking up its success in London—and its plans to invest in a safety campaign and more parking spaces. Operators are keen to grow elsewhere in Britain, and beyond. As long as they can keep regulators on side, riders—and cities—will feel the benefits. ■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in Britain, sign up to Blighty, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.