Europe - Europe’s mayors are islands of liberalism in a sea of populists

City bosses are the functioning bits of increasingly dysfunctional polities. Every election in Europe these days seems to pit a moderate politician advocating mostly sensible ideas against a rabble-rousing populist with a bombastic dislike of migrants, gays and the European Union. The centrist usually wins, but the margins are dwindling. Is Europe thus destined to drift into reactionary dysfunction, one electoral setback at a time? Not so fast. Powerful as they may seem, Europe’s firebrand nationalists—even when they seize high office—are merely the meat in a liberal sandwich. Above them are EU wallahs, always on hand to police budget deficits and adhesion to the rule of law. Below the populists is a layer of pragmatic politicos who keep the day-to-day machinery of government on the road (and the roads free of potholes). Europe’s mayors, particularly those of big cities, are the unsung moderating force of the continent’s politics. Free of patriotic bombast and focused on getting buses running on time, they are the bulwark of moderate governance in a continent that needs it badly.This quiet layer of mayoral technocracy has seen rapid promotions of late. On May 18th Nicusor Dan, the centrist mayor of Bucharest, unexpectedly trounced George Simion to win the presidency of Romania. The campaign highlighted their different approaches to government. The hard-right Mr Simion pontificated on foreign policy, boasted of being “almost perfectly aligned ideologically with the MAGA movement” and spent part of the final week of his campaign in Brussels, a place not actually in Romania. In contrast Mr Dan once admitted that what really kept him up at night was the traffic in the capital. Voters plumped for the traffic guy. Another centrist mayor may be propelled to higher office on June 1st when Rafal Trzaskowski, the centrist Warsaw mayor who narrowly won the first round last week, faces off against a candidate backed by the illiberal Law and Justice party.At confabs in Brussels Mr Dan will meet fellow EU leaders familiar with cycle lanes, waste-water treatment and other unglamorous bits of the state. Bart De Wever, Belgium’s newish prime minister, was himself once perceived as a hard-right firebrand (his cause is the independence of Dutch-speaking Flanders), so much so that political rivals refused to include his party in ruling coalitions. A 12-year stint as mayor of Antwerp from 2013 was just the thing to show the electorate he was capable of more than soundbites. Giorgia Meloni once ran for mayor of Rome before settling for the Italian premiership; Ulf Kristersson, prime minister of Sweden, is an erstwhile vice-mayor of Stockholm. Meetings of EU leaders are chaired by António Costa, the president of the European Council who ran Lisbon for eight years before becoming Portugal’s prime minister.Across Europe mayors are often cut from a different political cloth to the rest of the governing class. Lefties do notably well locally even when their parties are out of favour nationally—perhaps unsurprisingly, given the cosmopolitan types who choose to make cities their home. Parties of the hard right, which lack the organisational nous to put up candidates for dull city jobs, are notably absent. The municipal discourse thus has a gentler feel to it (at least until the building of cycle lanes is discussed). Amsterdam’s mayor, Femke Halsema, who is appointed by central government rather than elected, is a progressive woman in a Dutch political system dominated by progressive-bashing men. Socialists and their left-leaning allies have been routed in France, losing out on all the top jobs at national level—but they still run Paris, Marseille and most other big French cities. Ms Meloni and her right-wing acolytes dominate Italian politics, but the mayors of Rome and Milan come from the moribund left. (The same is true in America, where most big cities are run by Democrats.)In central Europe, the spiritual home of continental illiberalism, local pols stand proudly as open-minded counterweights to majoritarian regimes. Fed up with the region being associated with the likes of Viktor Orban, the limelight-hogging Hungarian prime minister, the mayors of Prague, Bratislava, Warsaw and Budapest in 2019 set up a “Pact of Free Cities” where dynamic, hipsterish mayors showed another way was possible. The quartet travelled to Kyiv together to support Ukraine when some of their national leaders refused to do so. Another member of the club might have been Istanbul, whose mayor, Ekrem Imamoglu, proved such a threat to Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, that he was simply put in prison. The Pact now includes 32 European cities focused on “protecting democracy and open society”, not to mention sharing tips on handling thorny zoning issues.Town halls are obvious places to find capable managers. Demagogues rise by making promises; mayors stay in power by keeping them. Not all politicians who have thrived as mayor do well on the national stage. Olaf Scholz will be remembered more fondly for his seven years as mayor of Hamburg than for his three as German chancellor. Anne Hidalgo, now in her second decade as mayor of Paris, managed a risible 1.8% of the vote in her bid for the French presidency in 2022, behind no fewer than nine other candidates.Cities may seem easy to manage in comparison to countries. Often capitals are the richest part of the nation. Delivering public services is easier in densely populated places with a fat tax-base. But shortcomings are also easier to spot. Managerial ineptitude that exposes the shortcomings of populist national leaders can take years to emerge: underfunded public services degrade only slowly, and few voters follow the intricacies of foreign policy. In contrast, everyone swiftly notices when potholes go unfilled and buses run late. Blowhard politicians often talk about taking back control. Voters should pay more attention to those with a good record of taking care of the rubbish bins. ■Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.