Britain - The UK-EU deal is just a start 

The process of rejigging the relationship will be a long one. Sir Keir Starmer chose the gilt-edged splendour of Lancaster House in central London to stage the first post-Brexit EU-UK summit on May 19th. He, Ursula von der Leyen (the European Commission’s president) and António Costa (the European Council’s president) duly talked up a historic “reset” of relations. In fact what was agreed were some relatively small changes to eliminate the worst trade frictions, plus a new defence deal. But this may presage the start of longer negotiations that in time may bring the two sides significantly closer together.The defence-and-security agreement matters most, given the background of Russia’s war in Ukraine and Donald Trump’s demand that Europe must spend more on its own defence. Britain will now be able to take part in the EU’s planned €150bn ($169bn) defence fund (though it will have to pay its own fair share). Both sides have recognised that rebooting European defence without one of its strongest powers would not be sensible. The efforts by some countries to restrict such spending to EU members alone were seen off.On trade, the main agreement was for Britain to align with most EU food standards. That will facilitate trade in food and fish products, exports of which have suffered since Brexit. It will also reduce border checks between Great Britain and Northern Ireland, which was already subject to EU standards under the 2023 Windsor Framework negotiated by Rishi Sunak. As part of the deal, Sir Keir agreed to extend the current fisheries agreement for 12 years, to 2038. And the two sides are to link their carbon-adjustment mechanisms and aim for a joint electricity market.The third component of the deal was to work towards a youth-mobility (or “youth-experience”) agreement. This should make it easier for young people to move, study and work across borders. Britain is to explore how and when it might rejoin the Erasmus+ student-exchange programme. An agreement is to be made to co-operate in fighting organised crime through data-sharing and working through Europol, the EU’s police agency. And in a gesture to please grumpy tourists, Britons are to be allowed to use border e-gates at most EU airports, reducing annoying queues at passport control. Like other parts of the deal, the details will take some months to negotiate: use of e-gates may not happen before the summer.Critics from the Conservative Party and Reform UK, amplified by outrage in parts of the press, were quick to denounce the entire deal as a betrayal. The Daily Telegraph headlined its report “Kiss goodbye to Brexit”. The biggest grumbles were about the fisheries deal, which was said to mean handing over Britain’s fishing waters to French and other fishermen for more than a decade. There were also complaints about Britain choosing to align with EU rules when it has no say in how they are drawn up, thereby submitting itself to the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice. And the youth-experience agreement was attacked as merely presaging more immigration. The Tories vowed to reverse all these changes once back in power.Yet this narrative of Brexit betrayal is absurd. Sir Keir has stuck firmly to his red lines of not joining the single market or customs union and not accepting free movement of people. Even after his “reset”, this is what was once termed a hard (not a soft) Brexit. It is, for instance, harder than the Brexit deal that Theresa May tried vainly to get through Parliament in 2019. The betrayal story is also increasingly out of line with shifting public opinion. A clear majority of voters now say that Brexit was a mistake, and an even bigger majority wants closer relations with the EU (this is true even of those who voted Reform in the last general election).It is true that Sir Keir has conceded more than he may have wished on fisheries, prompting the Scottish Fishermen’s Federation to talk of a “horror show”. Yet there was never much chance of taking back full control of British waters, not least because British fishermen export most of what they catch to the EU. As for being a rule-taker subject to the European Court of Justice, that is the price that any country wishing to sell into the much larger EU market inevitably has to pay. After all, the EU takes over 40% of British exports, twice as much as America and 20 times as much as India (the two other countries with which Sir Keir has recently struck deals). And a limited youth-experience deal is a long way from the old system of free movement of people across Europe.The agreement has hugely improved the mood music between the two sides. Bigger EU members have responded not by crowing over their negotiating triumphs (though France is pleased with the extension of fishing rights), but by welcoming the UK back to the table as a grown-up. The new German government under Friedrich Merz seems particularly pleased to have Britain back as a partner. This is clearest in defence and security, in which Britain is now set to play a significant role. But the food-standards and youth-mobility agreements are also seen as drawing the UK some way back into the European club, even as it continues to stand aside from the single market, the customs union and free movement of people.In all, given the constraints of his red lines and the EU’s own principles, Sir Keir has got about as good a deal as he could have done. It may not have a large economic impact (Sir Keir talks of it boosting GDP in 2040 by around £9bn, or 0.3%), but it will remove some of the worst irritations created by Brexit. The EU has remained determined not to give a country that is outside its single market a similar degree of access as a full member. The two sides will now initiate a process of continuous negotiation, overseen by annual summits with working parties set up to implement any agreements.Indeed, this recognition that the reset is not a single event but the start of a process may be what is most significant about the entire deal. It took almost four years of negotiation before Boris Johnson was able to sign the trade and co-operation agreement in December 2020. More than four years on, Sir Keir has managed to soften some of its more egregious features. He is now setting a course for further lengthy negotiations in future. That is what living alongside the EU elephant as a smaller party entails. Switzerland has been negotiating deals with the EU almost continuously for 30 years—and it recently agreed on yet another treaty that has still to be ratified.■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in Britain, sign up to Blighty, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.