Finance & economics - Wall Street and Main Street are split on Trump’s chaos

The president prompted a similar divide last time round. Newspapers across America are filled with tales of woe. In Texas fashion designers stay up at night worrying about “economic uncertainty”. In Maine the boss of a brewery complains about “rapid and massive fluctuations every single day on the tariffs”. In Washington state, border levies are “shaking up Skagit Valley farmers—spiking input costs, stalling sales, and fuelling uncertainty from fields to food banks”.The Economic Policy Uncertainty (EPU) Index, developed by economists at Northwestern and Stanford universities, is a measure of Main Street’s nerves. It counts instances of the word “uncertainty” (in the context of economic policy) in over 1,000 mostly local newspapers. The current average for May would be its highest monthly level in 35 years. Polls suggest that both Democrats and Republicans trust their local rags, meaning it should reflect how people feel.Wall Street, however, has calmed down. And it was not so panicked in the first place. During the recent turbulence, the VIX, a fear gauge, hit only its 24th-highest monthly level in the past 35 years. The index measures expected volatility for American stocks, based on the price investors pay for insurance.This pattern is odd when you consider Donald Trump’s words. In April he said he was “proud to be the president for the workers, not the outsourcers—the president who stands up for Main Street, not Wall Street.” Yet the same split appeared in his last term. Perhaps Mr Trump distorts the EPU. At times it seems like his raison d’être is attracting news coverage, ensuring more attention even than his damaging policies deserve.As Nicholas Bloom of Stanford notes, last time round Wall Street got it right: Mr Trump was “all bark and no bite”. Will it be correct once again? Stockmarkets have recovered, suggesting it might. But there have been victims, too. The Cortland Standard, a paper in New York state, was set up in 1867. It closed in March because proposed tariffs on Canada raised the cost of newsprint.■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in economics, finance and markets, sign up to Money Talks, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.