Business - Universal wants to steal Disney’s theme-park magic

It should brace for a bumpy ride. In the swampy Florida heat, a gaggle of enthusiasts, influencers and journalists gathered this week for the opening of Epic Universe, a new theme park in Orlando. The sprawling site, made up of five themed “worlds”, took Comcast, owner of Universal Pictures, $7bn and more than five years to build. Only a 20-minute drive from Walt Disney World, it is a bold bet that the company behind film franchises including Harry Potter and Super Mario can offer something just as magical.Universal opened its first Orlando theme park, Universal Studios Florida, in 1990, expanding the resort with a second one, Universal Islands of Adventure, in 1999, and a water park, Volcano Bay, in 2017. By adding Epic Universe, it will be hoping that it can keep its guests entertained—and away from the Magic Kingdom—for the duration of their trip.The new site certainly has plenty to enchant visitors. An animatronic dragon depicting Toothless, from the film “How to Train Your Dragon”, purrs convincingly when guests stroke the top of its head. One boy was so determined to win an augmented-reality Mario Kart race that he sternly instructed your correspondent not to get in his way.Epic Universe is Comcast’s biggest such investment so far, but it is not the only new site in the works. In August it will open a horror attraction in Las Vegas. A children’s resort will follow in Texas a year from now. Last month the company said it would build a big new theme park in Britain, too, expected to open in 2031. Not to be outdone, Disney a few weeks later unveiled plans for its first new park in a decade, in Abu Dhabi.Theme parks are a lucrative business. Disney’s experiences division (which includes parks as well as cruises and hotels), generated $34bn in revenue for the company in its most recent fiscal year, around a third of its total, and more than twice the profit of its entertainment division (which houses movies, TV and streaming). Comcast’s theme-parks business, which brought in less than $9bn in revenue last year, understandably wants more of the action. It is already finding ways to squeeze extra from captive visitors: one food stall at Epic Universe sells buckets of popcorn for $40.Stealing Disney’s magic will not be easy, though. Epic Universe isn’t flawless. Some rides are short and disappointing. As paying customers flood in for the first time, snags may emerge; Universal’s first site in Orlando was beset by technical glitches when it first opened.An even bigger problem is that Universal does not have Disney’s breadth of intellectual property, which covers everything from Star Wars and the Marvel universe to Frozen and Mickey Mouse. Guests are often attracted to visit theme parks by the characters and worlds they already love, rather than the latest in rollercoaster technology. When your correspondent asked a boy who was set to visit both Universal’s and Disney’s Orlando resorts which he was most looking forward to, the verdict was simply “whichever one has the Hulk”. JPMorgan Chase, a bank, reckons that the new Universal park will reduce footfall at Walt Disney World by just 1% in its current fiscal year, which ends in September.Comcast’s timing may also not be fortuitous. The theme-parks business is highly cyclical. An economic slowdown in America could thus spell trouble ahead for the industry, points out Laurent Yoon of Bernstein, a broker. Domestic travellers make up most of the guests at America’s theme parks. Even those that still buy a ticket may be less inclined to spend $40 on popcorn during a downturn. Declining numbers of international visitors, thanks in part to Donald Trump’s damage to his country’s image abroad, will make matters worse. Fewer foreign consumers visit than domestic ones, but they spend more on average.For now, the industry is all smiles. Analysts have been briefed that summer booking numbers look healthy. So far, the opening of Epic Universe has gone off without a hitch. Comcast will be hoping that the smooth ride continues. ■