Letters - A closer look at American finance

Also this week, Ireland’s tax regime, deep-sea mining, cyclists, opera, Britain’s political class. Letters are welcome via e-mail to letters@economist.comFind out more about how we process your letterYour special report on American finance (May 31st) overlooked three crucial points. First, leverage, or the ratio of a firm’s assets to its equity capital. It can amplify shocks and create vulnerabilities in the financial system. Banks are typically leveraged 10 to 12 times, whereas much of the institutional private-credit market is unleveraged. Business development companies operate with roughly 1.5 times leverage; insurers, six to eight times. When credit shifts away from banks, systemic risk typically falls.Second, resilience. The sharpest rise in interest rates in nearly half a century felled Silicon Valley Bank and other lenders, prompting a de facto blanket guarantee of all American deposits. While banks retrenched, private credit provided 85% of financing for buy-outs in the following year. This real-life stress test suggests that a more diversified financial ecosystem can also be a more robust one.Third, duration. Financing the trillions needed for digital and energy infrastructure demands long-term capital. As the “boundary” of what banks can provide got moved, investors needed to pick up the slack. Insurers, with long-term liabilities, are well suited to the task. They now account for 43% of private credit assets managed by leading firms. This can reduce systemic risk, and, in some ways, this represents a return to an older, less bank-centric, financing model. As Charles Goodhart taught me: “When central banks overlook financial frictions, their policies lose traction.” That does not mean going soft on new intermediaries. Rather, it means keeping a weather eye on how their size, evolution and connectedness could start to pose systemic risk. Private credit today, in my view, is not one of them.Huw van SteenisVice-chair Oliver WymanLondonCharlemagne took an oversimplified view of Ireland’s corporate-tax regime (June 14th). It operates transparently within the EU and OECD frameworks. To paint this as a fiscal fantasy land, where “accountants as versed in the arts of surreal creativity as James Joyce” magic away profits, ignores the very real industrial footprint of foreign firms in Ireland, the many attractive attributes Ireland uses to tempt foreign capital and the competitive environment that small countries are forced to navigate. Apple, Microsoft and Pfizer, to name a few, don’t just book profits, they employ tens of thousands of people, fund infrastructure and contribute substantially to public finances.Yes, Ireland’s GDP figures are distorted by multinational activity, a fact that Irish institutions openly acknowledge and work around using alternative measures like GNI. But to reduce Irish economic success to mere “tax shenanigans” is to ignore decades of sound policy. Ireland didn’t accidentally strike oil. It cultivated a climate of openness and credibility that attracted investment others failed to secure. Rather than scorn, this should invite thoughtful debate about global tax reform, a debate that recognises the agency of small countries, not just the grievances of superpowers.Fergal ScullyDublinLeticia Carvalho, the secretary-general of the International Seabed Authority, rightly underscored the importance of governance in deep-sea mining (By Invitation, June 10th). But although the ISA and its member states have rushed to reaffirm their commitments to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and multilateralism in public, many acknowledge a stark reality in private: commercial industry is not welcome at the ISA.Deep-sea minerals are not only essential to clean energy. They are foundational to national defence, supply-chain security and industrial resilience. With American companies and agencies having pioneered technology trials and environmental studies in the 1970s and 1980s, America is right to reassert its leadership in this exciting industry, especially as geopolitical tensions expose the risks of relying on land-based supply in adversarial hands.Having taken the American rulebook as its starting point, the ISA has since spent decades arguing over the details, with no end in sight. Delay doesn’t protect the ocean. It protects vested interests, all but ensuring China’s dominance on this new frontier. President Donald Trump’s executive order enabling deep-sea mining reflects a call for action, not isolation, supported by robust, transparent and enforceable rules that will ensure this resource is developed responsibly.If America’s allies hope to play a meaningful role in shaping this critical industry, they must move beyond platitudes and virtue-signalling and commit to real, enforceable rules. The opportunity is vast. We hope to see you out there.Gerard BarronChairman and chief executiveThe Metals CompanyVancouverIt is encouraging to see bicycles overtaking other modes of transport in London with many benefits for all Londoners, whether riders or not (”Two-wheeled agglomeration”, May 24th). Yet one disadvantage remains: many cyclists ignore red traffic lights, so that crossing a road in London is now like the Wild West for pedestrians, having to dodge danger from all sides. This behaviour seems to be worse from cyclists who rent their bicycles through one of the various app services on offer.There is a simple solution. Transport for London should require the apps to monitor their rider behaviour, either with reference to red lights being jumped, or speed relative to other riders or indeed a simple average speed. Rising above a certain speed could indicate that the cyclist did not stop for red lights or pedestrian crossings. The apps would then have to pay TfL a charge calculated on the number of offending riders. The apps would recoup the charge from the cyclist, similar to how dynamic pricing works, or the cyclist could get a reduced star rating.That would benefit all Londoners, whether mothers with strollers, tourists admiring Big Ben as they cross from Parliament Square, City workers dashing from Tube to office or hospitals patching up the broken bones that you mentioned.Jeb ClulowLondonYou remarked on how a political strongman can promise to keep us safe from criminals by suspending the rule of law, which leads to there being no rule of law to keep us safe from him (“A dictator’s progress”, May 31st). This is best captured in “A Man for All Seasons”, in which Thomas More warns about the dangers of abolishing laws, even in order to get at the Devil: “And when the last law was down, and the Devil turned round on you, where would you hide, the laws all being flat? This country is planted thick with laws, from coast to coast…and if you cut them down…do you really think you could stand upright in the winds that would blow then?” Likewise, Cicero wrote, “We are slaves to the laws so that we may be free.”Philip GreenNobel, CanadaYou wrote about the Haskell Free Library and Opera House, which straddles the border between Canada and the United States (“Elbows up, library cards out”, May 31st). For many years I was a member of a Gilbert and Sullivan troupe in Montreal and we would sometimes take our show to the Haskell opera. It was fascinating to be on the stage in Canada performing to the audience in the United States. Many people do not know that the opera house and library were a gift from Martha Stewart Haskell and dedicated to her late husband. It was built across the border on purpose so that people in both countries might enjoy the fruits of education and entertainment.I have a funny story about the lead soprano during a performance of “The Pirates of Penzance” we did there. But that’s another tale.David LanglosRussell, CanadaHit songs are getting shorter, you report (“Stay tuned”, June 7th). Anyone who misses longer songs could do worse than listen to the Allman Brothers live album from 1971 (yes, I have it on vinyl), “At Fillmore East”. The average playing time for the seven songs is over 11 minutes, with two, “You Don’t Love Me” and “Whipping Post” reaching over 19 and 23 minutes. It’s a refreshing change from tunes that seem to be over before you’ve had time to settle down with them to just enjoy the music.Robert ChecchioDunellen, New JerseyThe impetus to shorten songs has been around at least 50 years. Released in 1974, Billy Joel sang in “The Entertainer”:That was a reference to his label’s consternation over his “Piano Man” single from 1973, which ran for four and a half minutes. The label issued an additional radio edit that ran for, you guessed it, 3:05.David TiceRound Hill, VirginiaForget Mondeo Man, Bagehot has just identified the next group of disaffected voters in Britain who will decide the next election, the unapologetically middle-class campaigners (May 31st). They should be dubbed the Chardonnay Che Guevaras. Sip, rage, repeat.Lucy BeresfordLondon