The world this week - Politics

Despite a wobbly start a ceasefire held between Iran and Israel. The truce was called at the insistence of Donald Trump and came after America deployed B-2 planes to drop bunker-busting bombs on Iran’s uranium-enrichment facilities. Iran made a symbolic retaliation against America by firing missiles at its military base in Qatar. Mr Trump said that had been expected; there were no injuries. At least 28 people were killed in Israel by Iranian strikes during their 12-day conflict and over 600 in Iran by Israeli missiles. It was a victory for Israel, which has achieved an aura of dominance in the region. Mr Trump announced that he would soon hold talks with Iran about ending its nuclear ambitions.A suicide-bomber killed at least 22 people at a Greek-orthodox church in Damascus and injured more than 60, the deadliest incident in the Syrian capital since the Assad regime fell in December. The government, led by the interim president, Ahmed al-Sharaa, said the bomber was sent by Islamic State to destabilise the country. The episode is another example of the new regime’s failure to protect religious minorities. Colonel Assimi Goita, the leader of Mali’s junta, met Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, in Moscow. The two men signed deals to deepen trade and economic ties. Following a coup in 2021 Mali has been moving away from the West and towards Russia, exploring the possibility of Russian investment in its mining sector and inviting Russian mercenaries to help fight jihadists.Kenyans took to the streets to protest against police brutality, defying attempts by the authorities to keep them out of the centre of Nairobi, the capital. At least 16 people were reported to have been killed during the protests. It has been a year since more than 60 people were killed and dozens abducted in protests against an unpopular finance bill. A NATO summit in The Hague ended with an agreement by the alliance’s member states to increase defence spending to 3.5% of GDP, plus an additional 1.5% on broader security-related areas, a 5% goal that Donald Trump had insisted on (Spain provoked Mr Trump’s ire by watering down some language). Before the meeting, Mr Trump questioned America’s commitment to defending NATO countries, though in The Hague he said “We’re with them all the way.” His commitment to Ukraine was less sure. The American president held a friendly meeting with his counterpart, Volodymyr Zelensky, but offered no new help. As the summit began there was no let-up in Russia’s bombardment of Ukraine. At least 17 people were killed in a daytime attack in the Dnipropetrovsk region in Ukraine’s south-east. Earlier, nine people were killed during one attack in Kyiv and its surrounding area.Meanwhile, Canada signed a defence agreement with the European Union that will allow it to procure weapons jointly with the EU. Mark Carney, Canada’s prime minister, has said that his country is too reliant on America for its weapons. Britain recently signed a similar deal with the EU.Romania’s new governing coalition, headed by the National Liberal Party’s Ilie Bolojan, won a vote of confidence in parliament with broad support. Mr Bolojan, who was nominated for prime minister by Nicusor Dan, the newly elected centrist president, has promised to cut the budget deficit through a series of tax increases and spending cuts.Four opposition politicians in Georgia were sent to jail for refusing to testify to a parliamentary commission that is investigating corruption under Mikheil Saakashvili, a former president, who has been imprisoned for embezzlement. The opposition says the commission is illegitimate, as it was formed after an election in October last year that it claims was rigged by the conservative-populist government.On June 20th British MPs narrowly supported assisted dying at the bill’s third (and final) vote in the House of Commons. The majority was 23, down from 55 in the previous vote in November. The controversial bill had been amended, for example changing the approval needed for the procedure from a high-court judge to a panel of three experts that will include a senior legal figure. If it passes its final stage in the House of Lords the law will allow terminally ill people to end their life.South Korea’s new president, Lee Jae-myung, appointed the first civilian as defence minister in 64 years. Mr Lee’s choice of Ahn Gyu-back for the job fulfils a campaign promise not to have a member of the armed forces in the position. The imposition of martial law in December by the previous president, Yoon Suk Yeol, caused a crisis in the country. The new foreign minister is Cho Hyun, a former ambassador to the UN.In Thailand trouble mounted for Paetongtarn Shinawatra, who is battling to stay in power as prime minister following the withdrawal of a party from her governing coalition. Ms Paetongtarn reshuffled her cabinet and insisted her coalition was strong. But the party that withdrew its support, Bhumjaithai, said it would press for a no-confidence vote in parliament. An alliance of groups seeking Ms Paetongtarn’s removal has called a mass rally for June 28th.Meanwhile, the Thai government took steps to tighten the sale of cannabis, which was legalised for recreational purposes in Thailand in 2022. The health ministry says that decriminalisation has led to a big increase among young people who smoke the weed, but some see the decision as overtly political. The Bhumjaithai Party was the main driver of the decriminalisation policy and it has now left the government.The Vietnamese government has abolished the death penalty for eight categories of crime, according to state media. These include attempts to overthrow the government, damaging state infrastructure and embezzlement. This means that the death sentence handed down last year to Truong My Lan, a property developer, for embezzling $12bn from a bank will probably be commuted to life imprisonment.The Colombian government blamed local rebels for the kidnapping of 57 soldiers in Cauca, an area heavily dependent on cocaine production. The soldiers were captured by locals under duress from the rebels, according to the defence minister. All 57 were freed in a military operation without a shot being fired.Roberto Samcam, a former Nicaraguan military officer turned critic of the country’s dictatorship, was gunned down in San José, the capital of Costa Rica, where he was living in exile. He is at least the fourth Nicaraguan dissident to be assassinated in Costa Rica since 2021.Zohran Mamdani claimed victory in New York’s mayoral Democratic primary, a big upset for the party’s establishment. Mr Mamdani sits firmly on the Democrats’ progressive wing (his main campaign promise is to freeze rents on rent-stabilised properties) and he would be the first mayor from a Muslim and South Asian background if elected in November. Andrew Cuomo, a former state governor and firm establishment favourite, came second. He has not ruled out standing as an independent in the November election.