Leaders - RFK’s loopy approach to vaccines endangers Americans 

Donald Trump’s health secretary undermines global public health, too. When it comes to vaccines, President Donald Trump’s instincts have sometimes been sound. In May 2020 he launched Operation Warp Speed, which came up with inoculations for covid-19, based on a new mRNA technology, at an unprecedented pace and scale. By one estimate, covid vaccines averted 18.5m hospitalisations and 3.2m deaths in America in two years. And Mr Trump wisely got himself jabbed. So why is he now letting his health secretary, Robert F. Kennedy junior, dismantle the country’s vaccine-making ecosystem?Mr Kennedy is what is known politely as a “vaccine sceptic” and impolitely as a crank. He is undermining trust in, sensible scrutiny of and incentives to invest in one of modern medicine’s greatest wonders.Time and again he casts spurious doubt on the safety of vaccines. His department has hired a conspiracy theorist to investigate a long-debunked link between vaccines and autism. He warns against the human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine, which is estimated to have reduced American cervical-cancer deaths by 62% in the past decade. (As a lawyer, he was involved in a lawsuit against the vaccine-maker, Merck; he promised that any profits from it would go to his son, but that hardly erased the conflict of interest.) He has scrapped the recommendation that expectant mothers should be vaccinated against covid, as 120 other countries advise. He called the measles jab a “personal” choice, and urged giving children vitamin A. Several have been hospitalised for liver damage from vitamin A overdoses, and measles is resurgent in America, along with whooping cough, another vaccine-preventable disease. At least eight people have died this year.Mr Kennedy’s efforts to warp scrutiny of vaccines are equally troubling. This month he fired all 17 members of a committee that determines which vaccines are recommended (and thus funded). A new eight-member committee has less expertise and more doubts; it includes two former paid witnesses in legal cases against vaccine-makers. Mr Kennedy insists this will ensure Americans receive safer vaccines. More probably, they will receive fewer. As if all this were not bad enough, he is cutting funding. One step is to cancel federal contracts to develop vaccines for bird flu and HIV. Another is to refuse to support global efforts to roll out vaccines in poor countries—which benefits Americans by limiting the spread of infectious diseases. Alarmingly, he also has some power over a federal scheme that shields vaccine-makers from litigation.Vaccines are unusual because they are given not to the sick but to billions of healthy people. By the laws of chance, many who receive them subsequently fall ill. To prevent vexatious lawsuits from making vaccine production a money-loser, many countries have schemes that weigh the evidence and directly compensate those who suffer such things as allergic reactions, nerve damage or clots. No one claims that vaccines never cause harm; only that the benefits far outweigh the costs. Mr Kennedy has criticised vaccine liability shields, which make life harder for litigators. If he uses his power to hobble America’s scheme, drug firms could pull vaccines from the market, drastically raise prices, or cut back on research.So his boss faces a choice. Will he let his most eccentric henchman continue to undermine public health? Or will he show the same good sense he demonstrated when he launched Operation Warp Speed? If Mr Trump is wise, he will brave the ire of his vaccinephobic supporters and rein in—or sack—his health secretary. ■Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.