The world this week - Business

After several false starts over the past decade, Tesla at last launched its robotaxi service, though it was a subdued affair. The electric-car company rolled out a small fleet of vehicles in Austin that picked up invited Tesla-friendly passengers. The driver’s seat in the autonomous cars was left empty, though a safety worker sat in the front passenger’s seat. There were a few bumps in the road. The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration reportedly got in touch with Tesla after videos posted on social media appeared to show several driving mishaps.A giant merger in the advertising industry between Omnicom and Interpublic was given the go-ahead by America’s Federal Trade Commission, but only after the companies signed a consent decree promising not to boycott platforms because of their political content. The FTC is investigating whether ad agencies have violated antitrust law by co-ordinating spending boycotts of conservative media.Nvidia’s share price hit a new record high, its first of the year, giving it a market value of nearly $3.8trn. The chipmaker’s stock fell sharply earlier in the year amid wider investor concerns about tech companies’ commitment to spending on artificial intelligence, but those worries have receded.Niger said it would nationalise a uranium mine that it jointly owns with Orano, a French company. It is the latest in a series of nationalisations in Africa’s Sahel region. Mali has placed a gold mine operated by Barrick under state control, and Burkina Faso has nationalised five gold mines recently.America’s National Transportation Safety Board issued an executive summary of its investigation into the incident in which a panel came off a Boeing 737 MAX 9 passenger jet that had just taken off from Portland in January 2024. The NTSB blamed the aerospace company for failing to “provide adequate training, guidance and oversight” to its factory workers. It also criticised the Federal Aviation Administration for being “ineffective”. The full report will be published in the coming weeks.Israel’s stockmarkets hit new records, as investors bet that the military action taken against Iran will make the country safer. Tel Aviv’s TA 25 and TA 125 indices are up by 10% in the past month.Oil prices remained volatile amid the conflict. Brent crude soared to over $81 a barrel, the highest in five months, before plunging below $68 as Iran’s threat to blockade the Strait of Hormuz receded. Donald Trump called on American oil companies to increase output in order to lower prices. “Drill, baby, drill,” the president exhorted, “and I mean now.”Two court rulings decided that the firms behind generative artificial intelligence could use copyrighted books without permission to train their models. One judge said that Meta could continue to do so after finding that a group of authors who had sued it for using their material had made “the wrong arguments”. This doesn’t mean Meta’s behaviour was “lawful”, he said. A similar judgment found in favour of Anthropic against another set of authors, though the judge in that case said that Anthropic’s storage of 7m tomes in a “central library” was not fair use of the material and set a trial for December. FedEx withdrew guidance on revenue and profits for its full fiscal year because of the uncertainty over trade with China. Freight volumes from China plunged in May when duties were slapped on small packages. Meanwhile, tributes were paid to Frederick Smith, who founded Federal Express in 1971 and has died at the age of 80. He ran the company until 2022, when he became executive chairman. Mr Smith started operations in 1973 with 14 small planes carrying 186 packages. Now FedEx ships 16m packages a day.Despite pressure from Donald Trump to cut interest rates, Jerome Powell stuck to his guns and suggested to Congress that the Federal Reserve won’t do so until September, at the earliest. The Fed’s chairman said that the impact of tariffs on the economy will be clearer by then. Speculation continues to swirl that Mr Trump is about to name a replacement for Mr Powell, even though his term doesn’t end until May 2026.Carnival cruise line issued a stellar set of earnings and raised its outlook. The company said that although it is not immune from current economic headwinds, business was proving to be incredibly resilient. It is helped by the popularity of cruise ships among the young. Around 67% of cruise travellers are Gen X or younger, according to an industry report, and 36% are under 40. Carnival offers many activities aimed at youthful passengers, such as “dive-in” movies at swimming pools.