United States - Even for $10bn, the Los Angeles Lakers may look like a bargain

A seeming vanity investment is in fact a market-beating asset class. When jerry buss, a chemist turned property developer, bought a package of assets headlined by the Los Angeles Lakers for $67.5m in 1979, it required financial acrobatics just as impressive as those of the basketball team’s stars. Short on cash, he swapped local apartment buildings to an insurance company for leasing rights to the Chrysler Building in New York, which he then exchanged for the club and its arena—and still needed a loan from the seller, who was embroiled in a costly divorce, to close the deal.Now, the National Basketball Association’s (nba) marquee club, which won 11 titles in 46 years under the Buss family, is being sold again. And this time, the buyer is a bit better prepared. On June 18th news broke that the Busses would sell their 66% stake in the Lakers to Mark Walter, the ceo of a large financial-services firm, for $10bn. Both the price tag and the purchaser exemplify the evolution of sports economics—and why what might seem like a vanity investment looks poised to sustain its record of market-beating returns.Until recently, it was hard to find comprehensive data on teams’ investment profiles. The “big four” North American leagues—the National Football League, National Hockey League, nba and Major League Baseball—have just 124 teams, which rarely change hands. But last year the University of Michigan’s business school and Arctos, a private-equity firm, launched an index of aggregate returns, based on around 500 historical transactions. And the numbers confirmed that juicy exits like the Busses’ are in fact the norm. On average, owners of big-four teams have reaped a 13.1% annualised return since 1960, compared with 10.4% for America’s S&P 500 stockmarket index. Sports franchises have also enjoyed minimal volatility: even in the wake of the 2008-09 financial crisis, franchises continued to sell at lofty valuations.Such results stem from strong fundamentals, accelerated by legal and technological changes. Worldwide, top-tier sports teams have two unique advantages. Their brands are remarkably robust: win or lose, hundreds of thousands of fans will buy tickets, and tens of millions will watch on tv. Moreover, scarce sports teams are the ultimate “positional good”—the cost of joining the club will generally be set at whatever the 100th-richest would-be owner can afford, but the 200th cannot. As wealth inequality grows, so do team values.Beyond that, the big four’s structure makes them far better investments than European football. Every team has a permanent local monopoly or duopoly; a large portion of turnover is shared between clubs; and payroll limits and entering-player drafts keep salaries around 50% of revenues, while giving every team a chance to contend for a title. These rules make losing money almost impossible. In Europe, by contrast, football teams’ turnover oscillates wildly based on how they perform on the field, and player costs exceed 70% of revenue. Big-four owners have also benefited from subsidies from local governments, in the form of taxpayer-funded stadiums.Sports teams have fared even better of late, with the index rising 89% in the three years to March. One reason is the recent legalisation of sports betting. Gambling companies both fund leagues directly, via sponsorship and data purchases, and expand sports’ reach via mass advertising, enticement of new audiences, and conversion of casual fans into feverish bettors.Another is the recent authorisation of institutional investors, such as Qatar’s sovereign wealth fund. For now, such buyers are limited to passive, minority stakes. However, they reflect a trend away from idiosyncratic local businesspeople like the Busses, who were prone to penny-pinching and hiring former players, in favour of corporate-style titans like Mr Walter. His financial firm, Guggenheim Partners, manages nearly $350bn in assets, and his holding company has already turned the Los Angeles Dodgers baseball team into a consistent winner with record-setting attendance. The more profit such owners can squeeze out by improving management, the higher the price they can fetch.Finally, the shifting media landscape has provided an unlikely tailwind. A decade ago, cable television was a cash cow: teams that broadcast games on their own channels collected carriage fees that were baked into the price of a basic monthly cable bundle. Cord-cutting threatened to eliminate this “sports tax” on non-fans.But streamers have in fact proved even more lucrative. Whereas cable operators typically had enough market power to drive a hard bargain, streaming services compete fiercely for content. Moreover, sports are the rare genre that viewers insist on watching live, making them a favourite of advertisers. Leagues have devised new marquee events, like the nba’s in-season tournament and the nhl’s 4 Nations Face-Off, to create extra appointment viewing. As a result, bidding wars have heated up. The nba’s recent $77bn, 11-year deal more than doubled the previous rate.For now, the Lakers are the only team to achieve an 11-figure sale. But on current trends, it is mere single-digit-billion prices that will become unusual.■Stay on top of American politics with The US in brief, our daily newsletter with fast analysis of the most important political news, and Checks and Balance, a weekly note from our Lexington columnist that examines the state of American democracy and the issues that matter to voters.