United States - Oklahoma City has been reborn, 30 years after the bombing

Basketball is only the beginning. The loudest arena in the National Basketball Association is in Oklahoma City. At the final game of the league championship on June 22nd, the crowd willed the local squad on to victory at 110 decibels. “It’s an on-court sports accomplishment”, says the city’s mayor, David Holt, of its first big-league title. But it is also “a prism through which to see the progress of our city”. Thirty years after a white nationalist’s bomb tore through the local federal building, killing 168 people, Oklahoma City’s residents are determined to be known for something other than the terrorist attack. A big-league championship is the latest step toward that goal. The city’s rebrand, however, is much broader than that.More than $3bn of taxpayer-funded capital investments since the bombing have brought business, culture and people back to a once-desolate city centre. The basketball arena was one of the city’s first projects. Later ones include the kind of projects that might attract high-earners, including a streetcar system and a civil-rights centre. As a result, Oklahoma City now looks like a place where professionals want to sip matcha lattes. The city’s low costs and low taxes are big draws, too. Its fortunes used to rise and fall with the price of oil, but aerospace and bioscience businesses have added fresh blood and ballast to the economy.A 50% increase in population since 1995 has also made the city more diverse. The percentage of white residents declined from 75% in 1990 to 54% in 2020. It is also increasingly purple. Republicans used to win the surrounding county by double digits; Donald Trump squeaked in with just over 49% of the vote in 2020 and 2024. If Oklahoma City is unexpectedly liberal and welcoming, that is perhaps in part a legacy of the bombing itself. The price of political extremism is never far from residents’ minds. There is a memorial museum where the bomb’s crater once scarred the city. It teaches the “Oklahoma Standard”, a set of values which emphasises generosity toward one’s neighbours. It is, the city hopes, a practice that visitors might remember it by in the future. ■Stay on top of American politics with The US in brief, our daily newsletter with fast analysis of the most important political news, and Checks and Balance, a weekly note from our Lexington columnist that examines the state of American democracy and the issues that matter to voters.