United States - Why America’s hospitals don’t want their taxes cut

Congress is taking aim at a gimmick vital to rural health providers. The American Hospital Association (AHA) may be the only trade group in Washington that is lobbying against a proposed tax cut for their members. Congressional Republicans’ One Big Beautiful Bill Act is undergoing late revisions ahead of the Senate’s self-imposed July 4th deadline. A particularly contentious area involves provider taxes: obscure levies raised against hospitals, nursing homes and other medical offices. On the face of it, cutting those taxes sounds like good news for hospitals. But the levies are a financing gimmick used to fund Medicaid, a health programme for the poor, and for funnelling money to hospitals. The AHA’s president warns the tax cuts are so severe they could close rural hospitals.The scheme arises from the fact that Medicaid’s cost is split between states and the federal government, with Washington roughly doubling however much states spend. To finance their part, states tax hospitals. The hospitals then receive much, if not all, of that money back for providing Medicaid services. Because the federal government ends up double-matching that spending, states rarely have to chip in anything. For example, thanks to one hospital tax in Arizona, passed in 2020, the state has managed to increase payments to hospitals by over $1bn, without spending any more state money. This manoeuvre’s importance varies by state (see map), but has grown over time. The taxes are entirely legal but they are the bête-noire of budget hawks as they seek to incentivise states to keep costs down. “The whole thing is such a financial shell game,” says Brian Blase, who has advised Donald Trump on health care. “It’s a perverse set of financial incentives and just terrible public policy.”The latest version of the bill in the Senate would place stricter limits on provider taxes in the states that have expanded Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, from 6% of patient revenues to 3.5%. It would also scrap taxes imposed on insurers that administer Medicaid revenue. The Congressional Budget Office, a non-partisan scorekeeper, is yet to price out the Senate proposal, but old estimates say capping provider taxes at 2.5% of revenues would have saved the federal government about 4% of the total cost of Medicaid, or about $240bn over ten years. States would then be on the hook to make up the shortfall, possibly by cutting Medicaid benefits—leading to outrage from hospitals.Senators from vulnerable states are starting to resist. Thom Tillis, from North Carolina, is handing out flyers estimating the costs for Republican states. Others have called for the Senate to revert to the House’s more modest plan—merely a block on new taxes—or introduce a fund to shield rural hospitals. Both Democrats and Republicans have tried in the past to cut down on hospital taxes, says Tom Scully, who ran Medicaid under George W. Bush. “It was whack-a-mole,” he sighs. “We were trying for years to slow this down.” Previous attempts failed as the taxes are now so ingrained. The politics are not straightforward. Republicans are keen to fund tax cuts that are actually wanted by their recipients and to stop squirrelly budgeting, but an increasing share of their voters rely on Medicaid. According to Morning Consult, a polling firm, Mr Trump won Medicaid recipients by two points in 2024. Four years earlier, he lost them by 19.  ■Stay on top of American politics with The US in brief, our daily newsletter with fast analysis of the most important political news, and Checks and Balance, a weekly note from our Lexington columnist that examines the state of American democracy and the issues that matter to voters.