Briefing - Israel’s war with Iran is over 

But its impact is uncertain. ACEASEFIRE agreement rarely surprises the countries that are supposed to cease firing. But that is what happened in the middle of the night on June 23rd, the 12th day of a war between Israel and Iran. Donald Trump announced the end of the war on social media (where else?), saying that the combatants had begged him to make peace. His announcement seemed to catch both Israel and Iran off-guard; they took hours to confirm the news.Earlier that day the Middle East had been bracing for wider conflict. Iran had warned it would retaliate for American strikes on June 22nd, which had targeted three of its nuclear facilities. America’s allies in the Gulf feared they would be the target. But the response, when it came, was largely symbolic: a barrage of missiles fired at al-Udeid air base in Qatar, with plenty of advance warning for both Qatar and America (which uses the base). No one was hurt.Still, it gave Mr Trump a final impetus to end the war. He called Binyamin Netanyahu, Israel’s prime minister, and told him that he would soon announce a ceasefire. Having enlisted America’s help to strike Iran, Mr Netanyahu was in no position to refuse. Mr Trump asked Qatar to convey the proposal to Iran. The emirate found itself in the odd position of playing mediator with a country that had just bombed it. Iran was quicker to accept: it was being battered. Despite some early violations, the deal seems to be holding. Mr Trump declared on June 25th that America and Iran would meet for talks “next week”.Everyone involved in the conflict can claim to have achieved their main goal. Israel did real damage to Iran’s nuclear and ballistic-missile programmes, the stated aims of the war. The Iranian regime survived, weakened but intact. Mr Trump dropped his big, beautiful bombs without getting sucked into a long and unpopular conflict. And Gulf states avoided their nightmare scenario of a destructive Iranian attack on their soil.The question now, though, is how long any of them can preserve those accomplishments. There is a hopeful scenario in which Mr Trump’s truce leads to serious diplomacy and lasting calm. More likely, though, it sets the stage for further conflict between America, Iran and Israel.For now, the Iranian regime is relieved that the fighting is over. It suffered heavy losses in 12 days of war. Israel assassinated the top echelon of its armed forces, including the head of its missile programme and the commander of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC), its praetorian guard. Israeli jets knocked out scores of Iranian air-defence batteries and perhaps two-thirds of its ballistic-missile launchers. More than 600 people were killed, including many civilians.It is hard to assess the damage to Iran’s nuclear programme. Both Israel and America bombed uranium-enrichment sites at Fordow and Natanz and a third facility near Isfahan. But it is not clear how severe the destruction is and how much nuclear equipment Iran might have stashed elsewhere.Iran was unable to fight back effectively. It did not down a single Israeli jet (though it did destroy a couple of drones). Of the 532 ballistic missiles it fired at Israel, just 31 hit populated areas; the rest were intercepted, misfired or struck deserted parts of the country. Its barrages killed 28 people and destroyed scores of buildings. But they failed to hit the sorts of strategic targets, such as air-force bases, that might have hindered Israel’s war effort. Nor were its proxies much help. Hamas and Hizbullah, Iranian-backed militias in Gaza and Lebanon respectively, had already been smashed in their own wars against Israel.Still, Israel’s short-term success belies an enduring conundrum: how can it preserve these gains? Iran will seek to rebuild its conventional arsenal, and probably its nuclear programme as well. It cannot do so overnight, of course. Sanctions make it hard to import weapons and the components to build them. Russia, its main air-defence supplier, does not have batteries to spare. Israeli spies will keep close watch on Iran’s nuclear project. In time, though, the threat will inevitably grow.One option for Israel is to pursue the sort of maximalist policy it has adopted in Lebanon and Syria. It agreed to a ceasefire with Hizbullah in November but has continued regular sorties against the group, which the Lebanese government is powerless to prevent. In Syria, Israel conducts air strikes every few weeks against different armed groups; it has also occupied a swathe of land in southern Syria and courted the Druze, a minority group, as a local proxy. Any stirring of a potential threat in either country is met with force.This approach would not be sustainable with Iran, a huge country more than 1,000km away. The war, which saw Israel conduct roughly 100 missions a day, was an enormous strain on its air force—and a burden on its treasury, too. To fight at such a tempo for a year would have cost about 20% of Israel’s GDP, based on estimates from government economists. America helped underwrite the cost but might tire of constant war in the Middle East. Mr Netanyahu claims Israel has “placed itself in the first rank of the world’s major powers”. But a country of just 10m is not big enough to act as a permanent hegemon in the Middle East.The other option is diplomacy: having battered both Iran and its proxies, Israel can negotiate from a position of strength. Two weeks ago Israel and Hamas were close to agreeing on a ceasefire that would have paused that war for at least 60 days and perhaps led to a lasting truce. With Iran reeling, Israeli officials hope Hamas has been deprived of its main backer; perhaps it will be more willing to offer concessions. Other deals are possible too. Syria’s new government is willing to discuss peace, if not full recognition of Israel.Diplomacy with Iran is even trickier. The Islamic Republic will not negotiate with Israel. But Israeli security officials recognise that the ceasefire will be short-lived without an agreement that puts strict limits on Iran’s nuclear and missile programmes. Mr Trump sounds diffident about replacing the deal he ripped up in 2018. It would probably take months of haggling. It would also require concessions from Iran—which its regime has so far shown no signs of making.For now Iran is keen to project an aura of strength. It organised rallies on June 24th to celebrate its “victory” over Israel (turnout did not seem overwhelming). This is only a façade: penetrated at the highest levels by Israeli intelligence, the regime is paranoid. It has already rounded up hundreds of alleged Israeli spies. At least six have been executed.Ali Khamenei, the supreme leader, is 86. There was speculation even before the war about who his successor should be and how the balance of power between clerics and military men might shift. The events of the past two weeks have heightened the IRGC’s ascendance. Isolated for his own safety, Mr Khamenei delegated decision-making to a new council, or shura, dominated by the Guards. “The country is in effect under martial law,” an observer opined during the war.A year ago the regime was rocked by infighting. Businessmen, military professionals and ideologues battled for supremacy. Hardliners chased pragmatists from state institutions. Rival factions blamed each other for the death of Ebrahim Raisi, the president, in a mysterious helicopter crash in 2024. The war has helped the elite coalesce against a common enemy.It has also overridden popular hatred of the regime, at least temporarily. No one responded to calls from Mr Netanyahu and Reza Pahlavi, Iran’s would-be king, for a popular uprising. Early admiration for Israel’s military prowess turned to outrage as its targets widened and the death toll mounted. Political prisoners, mothers of executed protesters and exiled pop stars all called on Iranians to rally to their country’s defence. “It’s backfired on Bibi,” says a dissident former official, using Mr Netanyahu’s nickname.But the rally-round-the-flag effect may be short-lived. This is not the 1980s, when an invasion by neighbouring Iraq triggered an existential war that helped the nascent Islamic Republic consolidate power. The regime chose to embark on a long confrontation with Israel, a country with which it has no natural disputes. It spent tens of billions of dollars preparing for war, only to be humiliated when the war finally came.That will probably leave Iran’s regime weaker, not stronger. Some Iranians hope that it will slowly collapse in the coming months, as even its supporters lose faith. It could also try to ensure its survival by conceding: a deal with America could end both Iran’s economic isolation and the threat of future Israeli attacks.More likely, though, is that Iran’s paranoid, humiliated leaders will cling both to power and to their nuclear programme. Even if Iran does not withdraw from the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), a clear sign of hostile intent, it may reduce its already less-than-stellar co-operation with the UN’s nuclear watchdog. Mr Trump was quick to insist that America’s strikes had “totally obliterated” Iran’s nuclear sites. If the coming months prove him wrong, dealing with the continued threat will require a lasting American commitment.Some fear that Mr Trump is not up for that—that he will tire of the region’s internecine feuds. “We basically have two countries that have been fighting so long and so hard that they don’t know what the fuck they’re doing,” he told reporters on June 24th, as he tried to cajole Israel and Iran into abiding by the ceasefire.Others in America fear the opposite scenario: they see a parallel with the aftermath of the first Gulf war, in 1991, when America expelled Saddam Hussein’s invading forces from Kuwait but left him in power in Iraq. Instead of toppling him, it sought to hobble his regime through sanctions, a no-fly zone and periodic bombing raids. In the end an exasperating decade of attempted containment simply proved a long prelude to the invasion of 2003.Mr Trump insists he will not get sucked into any more “forever wars”. No one in Washington is talking about sending troops to Iran. But America’s interventions in the Middle East often become mired. Ronald Reagan’s peacekeeping mission in Lebanon prompted suicide-attacks on the American embassy and a Marine barracks in 1983. Barack Obama’s air campaign in Libya in 2011 caused a still-unresolved civil war. Iran, for its part, has tormented America since the days of Jimmy Carter, when Islamic revolutionaries took staff at the American embassy hostage for over a year.To avoid that, Mr Trump will have to negotiate. The most convincing deal would start with Iran forswearing the enrichment of uranium and surrendering its stock of highly enriched material. But Iran has always insisted that enrichment is its right. Mr Trump may find that his blandishments about trade and moneymaking—he wants to turn Iran into a “successful country”—fail to tempt the regime’s hawks. The harder he pushes for a zero-enrichment deal, the harder it may prove to persuade them.Mr Trump has already hinted at more American attacks, should Iran resume its nuclear programme or fail to conclude a deal. America has in effect made itself a cobelligerent with Israel. Even if it delegates the task of suppressing Iran’s missile and nuclear programmes—at which Israel has shown exceptional skill—it would still have to provide constant support and weapons. It could be called on to defend Israel and the Gulf and to send bombers back to hit targets beyond Israel’s reach.Some of Mr Trump’s own strategists have balked at diverting aircraft carriers, planes and air defences to the Middle East. The administration’s own interim defence strategy says America’s top priorities are to defend the homeland and prevent a Chinese invasion of Taiwan. The president can mollify his followers if he can show that a short, demonstrative burst of force can yield results. But a prolonged stand-off, let alone a renewed conflict, would be bad for business—not only for Mr Trump, but also for America’s closest Arab allies.They have little love for Iran. Gulf countries, in particular, mostly see it as an imperious bully: it has attacked Saudi oilfields, sabotaged ships in Emirati ports and armed the Houthis, a Shia militia in Yemen. The Gulf countries opposed the initial nuclear deal with Iran because it said nothing about such activities; they would cheer a new agreement that limited Iran’s missile programme or its support for proxies, to say nothing of the emergence of a new, less ideological regime.Yet the prospect of a prolonged conflict between America, Iran and Israel makes them nervous. The six members of the Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC), a club of petro-monarchies, pride themselves on stability. Expats move to cities like Dubai and Doha because they are safe. Saudi Arabia is in the middle of an ambitious push to diversify its oily economy, which involves convincing investors that the kingdom is an oasis in a chaotic region.The events of the past two weeks have dented that image. Expats debated what to do if nuclear fallout crossed the Gulf, or whether it was safe to get on planes with all the ballistic missiles zooming around the region. Scenes of panicked shoppers running through a mall in Qatar during Iran’s attack on al-Udeid may have seemed almost comical to Iranians or Israelis, who endured far more terrifying missile strikes during the war. But they deeply unnerve the Gulf’s royals. Iran settled for a symbolic attack this time; it may show less forbearance in future.Some policymakers in the Gulf are starting to reassess their view of Israel. In 2020 the United Arab Emirates (UAE) signed the Abraham accords, an agreement to recognise the Jewish state. Bahrain followed suit weeks later. Saudi Arabia has not yet established formal ties but has maintained close unofficial contacts with Israel for more than a decade. All three saw a relationship with the region’s strongest military power as a force for stability.It is starting to look as if the opposite is true. Israel convinced America to bomb Iran over the Gulf states’ strong objections. It has refused to end the carnage in Gaza, a source of widespread anger across the Arab world. It seems to be a destabilising force in Syria. Lindsey Graham, a Republican senator close to Mr Trump, has mused that the American strikes on Iran could pave the way for Saudi Arabia to recognise Israel. In fact, overt ties with Israel may look riskier at a time when Israel’s conflict with Iran is intensifying.Always besotted with branding, Mr Trump was quick to dub this the “12-day war”. The name seemed an allusion to the six-day war in 1967, which saw Israel thrash the combined armies of four Arab states. In hindsight, the latter was a decisive moment in the modern Middle East—the beginning of the end of the Arab-Israeli conflict. But it took 12 years, and another war in 1973, before the consequences became clear, with Egypt and Israel signing a peace treaty.What happens in today’s Middle East is equally hard to predict. The shadow war between America, Iran and Israel is over: they have shattered the taboo on direct conflict. Iran could take this moment to shed its revolutionary fervour. A serious nuclear deal would remove the threat of a future attack. It would also mollify the Gulf states. Along with a ceasefire in Gaza, a new Israeli government and a serious effort to end the conflict with the Palestinians, it could lead to regional normalisation. The Middle East can focus on “commerce, not chaos”, as Mr Trump pledged in a speech in Saudi Arabia last month.Events in the region are rarely so neat, however. A less hopeful scenario is that Iran goes back to its old habits: shorn of other forms of deterrence, it uses negotiations to buy time to rebuild its nuclear project. Israel and America will have to decide how to contain it, which will require focus from an unfocused Trump administration. The Gulf countries will hunker down and try to avoid the consequences. Perhaps in time Iran’s regime will moderate, or wobble—or perhaps this will prove the moment when it decides to embrace its pariah status and build a nuclear bomb. ■Stay on top of our defence and international security coverage with The War Room, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.