Asia - India gets no favours from Trump

Efforts to strike a trade “mini-deal” are dragging on. INDIA WAS one of the first countries to confirm, at the start of the year, that it would negotiate a big trade deal with Donald Trump. Talks accelerated in April, after America’s president whacked so-called “reciprocal” tariffs on most of the world’s countries (which for the moment are paused until July 9th). For months it has been assumed that India is a front-runner to strike an “interim” deal with America that would remove some bugbears, shield India from some of Mr Trump’s looming tariff hikes and set the table for a bigger agreement later in the year. Yet as the clock ticks down to July 9th, much of the early optimism has faded. Lately things have entered a “dramatic downward spiral”, reckons Richard Rossow, an expert on India’s economy at the Centre for Strategic and International Studies, a think-tank in Washington. During talks in Delhi this month, positions on both sides are said to have hardened.The issues under discussion are fraught. Among other things, America wants India to accept more of its farm produce—including genetically modified stuff such as maize and soyabeans. That is difficult for Narendra Modi’s government to swallow: nearly half of all Indian workers toil in agriculture. Indian governments have long sought to defend them from big American agricultural firms.It is not only angry smallholders that the government needs to worry about. India’s powerful tycoons have long been insulated from foreign competition; they are likely to resist any agreements that risk making business a bit harder. Hindu nationalist groups, whose support shores up Mr Modi’s government, oppose making big concessions to foreigners. The largest of these has argued that, to counter Mr Trump’s tariff threats, India should pull out of an international agreement that helps protect patents on valuable things such as medicines.Indians fear that for all his bluster about making trade “fair”, Mr Trump’s administration is intent on winning unequal gains. Using a tight deadline, “Mr Trump wants to bully India into a deal,” says Ajay Srivastava, an Indian former trade negotiator and founder of the Global Trade Research Initiative, another think-tank.A cooling of ties between America and India is probably making these issues tougher to resolve. In April J.D. Vance, America’s vice-president, made a genial trip to Delhi and two neighbouring cities. But since then Mr Trump has irked India’s government by claiming to broker a ceasefire in its conflict with Pakistan. He upset it all the more by suggesting that he used trade as a bargaining chip. On June 18th Mr Trump left many Indians flabbergasted when he treated Field Marshal Asim Munir, Pakistan’s army chief, to a smiley lunch in the White House.One big question for India is whether Mr Trump can be trusted to stick to any deal that gets signed. It is reportedly seeking assurances that the Trump administration is not going to introduce more tariffs down the line; it wants to ensure that any deal that is agreed now can be immediately renegotiated if that happens. Some think India should wait and see if Mr Trump will actually raise tariffs on July 9th. American courts may eventually rule that the president does not have the right to do so in the way he has threatened.Many Indian analysts look askance at the interim deal Britain signed with America in May, which they think required the smaller country to give too much away. If that is the reward for moving quickly, goes the thinking, perhaps dragging one’s heels is not so bad. “A trade war is not a physical war—nobody is bombing you,” advises Mr Srivastava. “One should not surrender.” ■Stay on top of our India coverage by signing up to Essential India, our free weekly newsletter.