The Americas - Dutch football has a secret team

Suriname’s squad is becoming less dire. In front of fewer than a dozen fans at Paramaribo’s Dr Franklin Essed Stadium, the emcee promises “fireworks” on the pitch. The opening exchanges of the Suriname Major League clash between Notch and Broki peter out into a medley of misplaced passes and goal-keeping howlers. Domestic football in Suriname, a country of 620,000 inhabitants in South America, is a mess. But thanks to an influx of diaspora players, the national side, popularly known as “the Natio”, could become the lowest-ranking team in history to qualify for a World Cup (North Korea currently holds this ignominious title). It helps that next year’s cup will feature the largest number of teams ever.Surinamese blood has run in the veins of some of the world’s finest footballers. In the years leading up to and following the country’s independence from the Netherlands in 1975, almost a third of the population emigrated to secure Dutch citizenship. During the 1990s the Dutch national football team relied on star players such as Ruud Gullit, Edgar Davids and Clarence Seedorf, all children of Surinamese immigrants. Today Virgil Van Dijk, captain of both Liverpool and the Dutch national team, is the most prominent of over 100 football players of Surinamese descent in Europe’s top leagues.Yet until recently, this talent largely benefited the Netherlands. Suriname does not allow dual citizenship. No top player would relinquish their Dutch citizenship, as players from outside the European Union are subject to stricter work permits in the Netherlands. That left Suriname unable to tap into its global talent pool. The Natio got stuck with the local dregs of the dribbling world. It went from being one of the Caribbean’s strongest sides in the 1970s to being ranked 191 out of 209 teams in 2015 by FIFA, football’s Swiss-based governing body. “I would have loved to have played for the Natio, but it was impossible,” sighs Brian Tevreden, a retired Dutch-born footballer who now manages Suriname’s national squad.The Natio’s fortunes changed in 2019, however, when FIFA altered its eligibility rules. It now lets Suriname issue temporary “sports passports” to Dutch-born players of Surinamese descent. Immediately after the ruling, Surinamese scouts started hiring older Dutch-born players who had given up on joining the Dutch national team. In 2021 the new recruits helped the Natio reach the Gold Cup, a prestigious football tournament for teams from North America, Central America and the Caribbean, for the first time in 36 years. FIFA now ranks the Natio in 137th place.This success has made it easier to attract younger players of Surinamese descent. The Natio emerged undefeated from its World Cup qualifying group in June and faces a final round against Panama, El Salvador and Guatemala in the autumn. Just seven players on the 23-man team were born in Suriname. Many locals who were initially sceptical of the European newcomers are warming up to them.Yet Suriname’s dysfunctional football association could stand in the way of the Natio’s budding greatness. The association has long been dogged by allegations of impropriety, which it denies. In 2021 a local team, Inter Moengotapoe, was banned from a regional football competition after its owner, Ronnie Brunswijk, a convicted drug-trafficker who is also Suriname’s vice-president, played in a match (he maintains his innocence in the drug-trafficking case). After the game, a video showed Mr Brunswijk appearing to distribute cash to his Honduran opponents in the changing rooms. Mr Brunswijk later explained that he was showing his gratitude to the Honduran team for travelling to Suriname to play a match.“Suriname has plenty of raw talent; with the right structures in place they could become a force in Caribbean football,” says Diederik Samwel, the author of books on the game in Suriname. Back at the Essed Stadium, a Notch midfielder glides the ball into the back of the net. ■Sign up to El Boletín, our subscriber-only newsletter on Latin America, to understand the forces shaping a fascinating and complex region.