China - The Dalai Lama faces a horrible dilemma 

Tibet’s spiritual leader is set to reveal one succession plan. China has another. For someone approaching his 90th birthday, the Dalai Lama is in remarkably good nick. On a mid-June morning, The Economist joined a group audience with Tibet’s exiled spiritual leader and watched him greet about 300 devotees and well-wishers individually. Dispensing advice and blessings for over an hour, he paused only once for a sip of hot water. He does this five times a week, plus occasional public teachings, in his adopted hometown of Dharamsala in northern India. Yet those close to the Nobel peace laureate admit that he is slowing down. He arrived for the audience in a golf buggy and was helped to his seat by three aides, as machinegun-toting Indian guards scanned the area. He rarely leaves Dharamsala since knee surgery in America last year. That raises a delicate question for those concerned about Tibet’s future, not least the governments of China and India: what exactly will happen when he dies?The clearest answers yet are expected in a video message from the Dalai Lama on July 2nd, four days before his birthday. By Tibetan tradition, after a Dalai Lama’s death, aides and senior lamas identify an infant as his reincarnation. But he can choose not to be reborn. He can also “emanate” as another person while still alive. Whatever his decision, China is certain to contest it. Its atheist Communist Party, which seized Tibet in 1951, says “emanation” is not permitted and that it alone can approve the next Dalai Lama. It hopes the demise of the current one, who fled to India in 1959, will curb international backing for his non-violent campaign for the greater autonomy of Tibet within China.When the Dalai Lama dies (or emanates), China is thus expected to name a rival successor, just as it did after the Panchen Lama—another senior Tibetan Buddhist figure—died in 1989. The Dalai Lama identified a successor to that post in Tibet but Chinese authorities whisked the child away (never to be seen or heard of again) and appointed in his place another boy, whom many Tibetans see as a stooge. China will probably press other countries to recognise its choice for the next Dalai Lama and punish those who endorse or have contact with the alternative. That makes this succession a historic test of the democratic world’s will—and capacity—to resist Chinese coercion and disinformation.There are significant risks for China, too. The current Dalai Lama (the 14th) is the only figure who commands authority among almost all the 7m Tibetans in China, as well as the 150,000-strong diaspora. Although China has long denounced him as a separatist “wolf in monk’s robes”, it has tried to persuade him to return to Tibet and endorse party rule there. Without him, the Tibetan movement could fragment and embrace a more radical drive for complete independence. Though that is unlikely to succeed in the near term, it could still undermine China’s image abroad as well as its efforts to enforce ethnic unity at home.The Dalai Lama has already revealed some details of his succession plans. In a book published in March, he said his heir would be born in the free world. There has also been talk of emanation as an option that would conclude the issue sooner and allow him to train his own successor. Still, people close to him now say that reincarnation is more likely. That would create a potentially risky leadership vacuum during the decade or two in which a successor grows up and is trained. But Penpa Tsering, leader of the Tibetan government-in-exile, tells The Economist that the risks are manageable, as the Dalai Lama gave up his political powers in 2011 and other senior lamas will provide religious leadership during the transition.He also says that China has been trying to revive back-channel talks since early 2023, although no meaningful progress has been made. Chinese intermediaries repeatedly ask about the Dalai Lama’s health, schedule and succession plans. “They’re worried,” Penpa Tsering explains. “If there’s one thing China can’t handle, it’s unpredictability.” Even so, Tibetans will need international support to resist Chinese meddling, he adds.America’s response is vital. It has long backed Tibetans’ demands for greater freedom and advocated talks between China and the Dalai Lama. During the first Trump administration, Congress passed a law authorising sanctions against Chinese officials interfering in the succession. Marco Rubio, America’s secretary of state, pledged continued support in March. But Trumpian cuts have withdrawn some $22m in annual funding for Tibetans, which is equivalent to more than half the government-in-exile’s budget.It is also unclear how Mr Trump views Tibet and the Dalai Lama, who once said he lacked “moral principle”. Mr Trump is less concerned by human rights than recent predecessors and his approach to China is dominated by a trade war. Dolma Tsering Teykhang, the deputy speaker of the Tibetan exiles’ parliament, notes that Mr Trump was once popular with Tibetans because he was seen as tough on China. India is also critical as it provides a home to the Dalai Lama, the government-in-exile and half the Tibetan diaspora. If the next one is found in India, as many expect, its government would probably offer him sanctuary. That would be politically popular as the Dalai Lama is revered by many Indian Buddhists and Hindus. And India has considered his presence a source of leverage over China. Yet it will still fret over irking its large neighbour. Bilateral tensions have finally eased between them after a four-year border stand-off ended in October. And India increasingly relies on Chinese goods: its trade deficit with China hit a record of $99bn in 2024-25. That makes the response from other democracies all the more important, particularly the European Union. The EU said in June that the next Dalai Lama should be chosen “without government interference”. No country is likely to risk having official contact with the next Dalai Lama, as China has imposed increasing commercial costs on those that do. The incumbent has not met a world leader since Barack Obama in 2016. But several democracies still speak out about rights abuses in Tibet and support the Dalai Lama’s “Middle Way”, as his quest for autonomy is known.Whether that continues could depend on how the Tibetan movement evolves after the Dalai Lama’s death. Lhagyari Namgyal Dolkar, a member of the Tibetan exiles’ parliament, thinks the Middle Way reflects outdated hopes that China will liberalise politically. Calling instead for independence would inspire more Tibetans and foreigners, she reckons. Others think such talk will provoke stricter policies in Tibet and alienate foreign supporters.The Dalai Lama’s announcement will not resolve such differences. He may not answer all the questions around the succession, either. But for many Tibetans, his statement will illuminate the real challenge ahead: how to preserve their identity after the man who embodies it is gone. ■Subscribers can sign up to Drum Tower, our new weekly newsletter, to understand what the world makes of China—and what China makes of the world.