Asia - Asia’s disgraced saint

As she turns 80, Myanmar’s jailed leader still has much support. ONLY AUNG SAN SUU KYI’S jailers know how Myanmar’s ousted leader spent her 80th birthday on June 19th. She was detained in February 2021 when the army staged a coup. She is believed to be held in solitary confinement in a purpose-built cell in a detention centre in Naypyidaw, the capital. Since her arrest only one letter from her has been received: to her younger son, Kim Aris, in January 2024.This year, to mark his mother’s birthday and remind the world of her plight, Mr Aris called on supporters to produce short video messages. Fans, most of them Burmese, recorded more than 110,000. Ms Suu Kyi may not see them—but the campaign is said to have irked Myanmar’s military ruler, General Min Aung Hlaing. One rumour online is that he has ordered his followers to send him more than 100,000 video messages for his own birthday, on July 3rd.The coup in 2021 followed an election the previous November in which Ms Suu Kyi’s party, the National League for Democracy (NLD), won 82% of seats in parliament. In December 2022 she was sentenced to 33 years in prison—later reduced to 27—for a series of offences, including incitement to resist the coup, electoral fraud and corruption (she denies them all). It is the fourth time military dictators have locked her up: between 1989 and 2010, in three separate periods, she spent some 15 years mainly under house arrest in a villa in Yangon, the biggest city. This stretch in prison is doubtless especially grim. Her latest incarceration has attracted much less attention from international human-rights activists than her previous imprisonments. That in part reflects the scale of Myanmar’s crisis: Ms Suu Kyi is only one of 22,000 political prisoners suffering in similar conditions, or worse. But the silence is as much because of deep dismay about things that happened when she was in power. Ms Suu Kyi is lambasted for not defending the mainly Muslim Rohingya ethnic minority when they came under attack from Buddhist neighbours in Rakhine state in 2015 and were massacred by the Myanmar army in 2017.Her disgrace was sealed when, as Myanmar’s “state counsellor”, she went to The Hague to defend her country against charges of genocide at the International Court of Justice. She admitted that war crimes were committed but stopped short of calling it a genocide. (A verdict on that case is still pending.) Ms Suu Kyi’s supporters say her priority in power was to introduce a fully democratic constitution, and that this mission required beguiling the generals who had the power to veto it. Others believe she shares the generals’ racist views.Min Zin of the Institute of Strategy and Policy, a Myanmar think-tank based across the border in Thailand, says Ms Suu Kyi is “narcissistic as a politician…She thinks she is a snake charmer.” Her failure to get the army to dance to her tune “brought the whole country down”. That does not mean people should refrain from calling for her release, he adds.Within Myanmar, at least, Ms Suu Kyi’s stock remains high. One recent survey carried out by Blue Shirt Initiative, a pollster, concluded that she remains “the most trusted political figure” in the country. The resistance against the coup is partly led by the National Unity Government, a parallel authority made up of mainly ousted NLD members of parliament. Its website still shows Ms Suu Kyi as state counsellor, the position she held when arrested; many of its members remain devoted to her. The junta is not at all squeamish about dispatching its enemies, but it seems to have chosen to keep Ms Suu Kyi alive. It may be fearful of the rage that would follow should she die in its custody, says Sean Turnell, an Australian economist and NLD adviser who spent almost two years in detention in Myanmar.There is a conceivable future in which Miss Suu Kyi eventually emerges from detention as a figurehead for a new, democratic government—perhaps with prestige but little power. For now, all the evidence points to a grimmer outcome: that she will age in prison in a benighted country, a snake-charmer bitten by the snake. ■