Europe - A defence splurge will slow Europe’s deindustrialisation

But probably not reverse it. Europe’s economy is being squeezed by low internal growth, tariff threats from America and a surge of imports from China. The threat of deindustrialisation haunts the continent. But there is a bright spot, even if the reason for it is grisly: the need to rearm to deter an imperialist Russia and help Ukraine fight back. Germany has changed its deficit rules to allow unlimited debt-funded defence spending. Other countries in Europe’s north and east, such as Denmark, Sweden and Poland, have announced boosts to their defence budgets to anything between 3% and 5% of GDP. NATO has a new target of spending 3.5% of GDP on defence. It all means that Europe plans to buy a lot more military kit in the years to come—and wants to make most of it at home.But whether more defence spending will compensate for the relative decline in European manufacturing and help preserve manufacturing jobs depends on the size of the sector, where its supply chains run and whether the type of manufacturing that is needed for arms production is a good match for those sectors in decline.Start with the raw size. Manufacturing made up around €2.5trn ($2.9trn) of value added in 2024, or around 16% of the EU total, down from about 20% in 1995 The share is higher, roughly, the farther east (or more Germanic) the country is. But what proportion of that is the defence industry and its complex supply chain is hard to determine, as official statistics generally keep such data confidential. Bottom-up modelling by EY, a consultancy, gives an idea, however. If, as it estimates, the European parts of NATO, which is most of the EU plus Britain and Norway, will need to spend around €137bn annually over the coming years in equipment, that would be about €65bn more than the current figure. The resulting increase in spending on Europe’s own defence sector and its associated supply chain would be €35.7bn, about 1.5% of the EU’s overall manufacturing-sector total and would, so EY reckons, add perhaps 500,000 jobs there.Less than a third of the additional €35.7bn would be in the defence sector itself; the rest would be spent elsewhere in the supply chain. That still translates into creating around 150,000 extra jobs in the actual defence sector. This number fits with those in a new report by Bruegel and the Kiel Institute, two think-tanks. Total employment in Europe’s biggest defence firms, according to the institutes’ estimates, rose from around 250,000 in 2021 to 280,000 in 2024, and most of the orders for new defence equipment have yet to arrive.How supply chains will evolve also determines where new jobs will be created. Before 2022 European defence was largely a national affair. The EU has always wanted to change that, in part to make the sector more efficient and integrated. This may now happen. Governments have agreed on €150bn in EU loans to groups of two or more countries for common defence procurement. Its European Defence Fund also aims to foster collaboration in research and development across borders.With integration comes specialisation. Supply chains will criss-cross the continent, and firms will build capacity where it is most economical to do so. That could transform the sector, much as other manufacturing sectors were transformed via integration into the EU’s single market and the EU’s enlargement to the east.And there is a big new weapons producer on the European stage: Ukraine. European arms-makers such as KNDS and Thales are flocking to the war-torn country to build ammunition and spare parts, and to develop new weapons. Germany has announced it will pay for long-range missile production in Ukraine, following the example of Denmark. “It was home to large parts of the Soviet Union’s advanced weapons production, and could become Europe’s low-cost arsenal now,” argues Jacob Funk Kirkegaard of Bruegel. The low costs and live conditions under which the weapons are being tested make it a prime location for future production, reducing the number of jobs created in the EU.Then there is the issue of what type of manufacturing jobs are to be created—and whether they can be filled with a shrinking workforce. Modern manufacturing requires higher technical and digital skills, not just in weapons-making. But rapid evolution on the battlefield means the sector itself is transforming radically, and more quickly than, say, the car industry. Kearney, another consultancy, warns of a severe shortage of workers with the right skills.Job losses elsewhere in manufacturing could help fill the gap. Take Germany, the industrial heartland of Europe. The jobs most common in the defence sector have two things in common. The first is that the number of unfilled jobs per unemployed person is very high (see chart), signalling an existing shortage of skilled workers. The second is that the level of unemployment among those professions has increased since 2023. “What is needed is to develop the skills of these workers further,” argues Enzo Weber of the Institute for Employment Research in Nuremberg. But there is a caveat. The build-up of capacity, and jobs, will only start if good intentions become long-term orders for Europe’s defence firms. ■To stay on top of the biggest European stories, sign up to Café Europa, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.