China - China’s new army of engineers

Its ranks will swell as the country’s high-tech industries grow. THE TEARS and toil were worth it. Some 4.8m pupils will soon learn that their scores in the recent gaokao exam have earned them spots on a bachelor’s degree course at university—unlike 8m of their fellow test-takers. How to make the most of their glittering futures? For many the answer is to study engineering.Over half of China’s young people now complete some form of higher education, which is provided by 3,000-odd institutions. In China, as elsewhere, an abundance of degrees has made each one less valuable. And as the economy has slowed in recent years, the youth unemployment rate has risen, even among graduates. It was 14.9% in May, according to the government. To stand out, young people want to get the most impressive credentials.In 2022, the latest year for which data are available, 36% of all Chinese undergraduate entrants—about 1.6m people—picked an engineering degree, up from 32% in 2010 (see chart). In Britain and America, which have far fewer students to start with, the proportion hovers around 5%. It is not because Chinese teenagers are especially fond of screwdrivers. Rather it is because China’s government is strikingly good at getting young people into the high-tech fields it wants to dominate.The obsessions of the Communist Party have long shaped educational choices in China. It exercises tight control over universities: their leaders are almost always party members and their funding is largely derived from the state, rather than student fees. During the early decades of party rule, the tiny proportion of China’s young people who made it to university studied hands-on subjects like mining and engineering, to help industrialise the country, and agriculture, to feed it.Student choices widened a little in the 2000s, as China’s private sector flourished. As more delved into economics or business management there was a drop in the share studying engineering. Foreign languages, literature and art also became increasingly popular. But this trend has stalled. Pupils now typically go on to pick engineering because they are worried about finding a job, reports a teacher from a Beijing school.China’s authorities have supercharged this shift. The party is a big fan of the discipline. Many high-ranking officials, including Xi Jinping, China’s leader, have engineering degrees. Now they want fresh cohorts of young engineers to support China’s high-tech manufacturing sector. In 2023 officials started telling universities to overhaul their degree programmes to focus more on strategic industries and technological bottlenecks. Last year the education ministry announced an “emergency mechanism” to create degrees more quickly, to meet “national priorities”.All this has led to a flurry of newly specialised engineering degrees. Over 600 Chinese universities now offer undergraduate programmes in artificial intelligence (AI), a field the party vows to dominate by 2030. The founder of DeepSeek, a dynamic AI company, studied the subject at Zhejiang University, in China’s east. Meanwhile many of the firm’s engineers were trained at the elite Peking and Tsinghua universities in Beijing.Last year several institutions started to offer degrees in “low-altitude” technologies, such as delivery drones and flying cars, which officials see as a new source of economic growth. Next year some places will offer degrees in medical-device manufacturing, a sector where China, for the moment, relies on American companies.Demand for these new courses has been strong. Middle-class Chinese parents pay close attention to the options available to their children. They think that if the government is promoting a new degree, there is a good chance state funds will flow towards related industries in the years to come and that job opportunities will follow, says Jiang Xueqin, an educational consultant in Beijing. That means they push their kids to study it.Meanwhile funding is falling, or disappearing entirely, for degrees that the government deems to be less useful. Some management or economics courses at Chinese universities can be mediocre (China has offered them for a relatively short period of time and they are typically taken less seriously by administrators). The humanities are considered more of a soft option. Across the country, institutions have put an end to more than 5,000 programmes over the past five years.This spring, the prestigious Fudan University, located in Shanghai, announced that it was slashing the share of places it offered for humanities students from 30-40% of the total to 20% in order to expand its high-tech programmes and create new “innovation colleges”. Last year Sichuan University, in the south-western city of Chengdu, stopped offering degrees in musicology, insurance and television studies. Two provinces have said they will reduce the number of students toiling for degrees in English. And several universities have promised to cut more subjects if a high proportion of graduates holding degrees in them cannot find employment.One kind of humanities degree, though, is gaining popularity: the sort that glorifies the party. Some universities now offer degrees in party history filled with glowing accounts of its rule over China. Over the past decade the number of colleges for Marxist studies in Chinese universities has grown from 100 to more than 1,400. They offer bachelor’s, master’s and doctorate degrees in the subject (needless to say, the colleges are all run by party members). And at least ten universities have set up centres specifically for the study of Mr Xi’s political philosophy. These courses, at least, are unlikely to disappear anytime soon. ■Subscribers can sign up to Drum Tower, our new weekly newsletter, to understand what the world makes of China—and what China makes of the world.