Middle East & Africa - As all eyes are on Iran, the horror in Gaza persists

Where people once died in air strikes, now they are dying as they try to find food. Israel might have stayed its bombardment of Iran, but the horror in Gaza continues. More Palestinians were killed in Gaza, according to the health ministry there, during Israel’s 12-day war in Iran than in that conflict. The widespread destruction of buildings of the early months of the war (around 60% have been affected) has slowed dramatically, but deaths have not (see charts). Whereas people were once killed in air strikes, the violence is now concentrated around the four new aid hubs that Israel has set up.Initially the Gaza Humanitarian Foundation (ghf), which runs the hubs, blamed the violence on teething problems. But the deaths linked to aid distribution have soared in the month since its launch. The UN says 410 Palestinians have been killed seeking food en route to the ghf’s centres.On June 24th at least 40 Palestinians were killed seeking aid in central and southern Gaza. Accounts differ. Doctors treating the wounded say the shrapnel matches Israeli artillery shells. Palestinians fleeing say Israeli tanks opened fire. Safe Reach Solutions, an American firm providing ghf’s security, says many of the incidents occur far beyond their perimeter fences and that no one within them has been hurt. Verifying any of these claims is difficult since Israel still does not allow foreign journalists into Gaza unsupervised. “We’re dealing with a starving population,” says a security contractor. “There’s no peaceful way of doing it right now.”Still the hungry keep coming. “The choice is between dying seeking food or starving to death,” says Ahmed Masri, whose son, Abed, was shot in the leg in an attack on June 14th while collecting food.It might help if Israel let in more food. The ghf says it has distributed 42m meals since its launch, less than one a day for every Palestinian, assuming women, children and elderly could all get it. And the foundation admits they cannot. Israel has sharply reduced aid flows via the un and other humanitarian groups. Even the ghf is starting to fret about Israeli access restrictions. It plans 20 centres but Israel has yet to let it expand beyond the four pilots. Other vital supplies are running out. The ghf does not distribute water or medicine. Desalination and sewage-treatment plants, water pipes and hospitals have been destroyed. Abed’s father took him to three field hospitals after he was shot. All turned him away because they had no medicine to give him.Deaths from disease, starvation and the lack of medicine are worsening the toll. Researchers at Royal Holloway, University of London and others say that by January 2025 8,500 people had died of war-related but non-violent causes since the conflict’s start. Based on interviews that month and a sample of nearly 10,000 people, they estimated that the death toll from traumatic injuries was 39-90% higher than that published by Gaza’s ministry of health, decried by Israel as a Hamas mouthpiece.Observers struggle to see a military rationale for weaponising food, water and medicine other than squeezing Palestinians into ever tinier slices of Gaza. Meanwhile, on the ground Israel still encounters resistance. Seven soldiers were killed when their armoured vehicle caught fire on June 24th. A military spokesman blamed explosives. Hopes for a ceasefire rest on the possibility that having helped Binyamin Netanyahu, Israeli’s prime minister, with his mission in Iran, Donald Trump will force him to accept a deal in Gaza. ■Sign up to the Middle East Dispatch, a weekly newsletter that keeps you in the loop on a fascinating, complex and consequential part of the world.