Europe - How strongmen mastered the art of dividing Europe

Soft-power Europe is often bested by hard-nosed autocrats. It takes weeks of haggling by ministers and their diplomatic underlings to craft what the leaders of the European Union later announce as the “conclusions” of their regularly scheduled confabs. Settling into a windowless conference room for a summit that will nonetheless drag well into the night is a time-tested ritual for the continent’s presidents and prime ministers. But a spectre hung over the group even as they prepared for yet another gabfest in Brussels on June 26th, as The Economist went to press. For in the same time it takes EU leaders to sign off on a communiqué that few will ever read, Donald Trump may well post a slew of social-media posts reversing, un-reversing then finally re-reversing American policy on precisely what his many counterparts sitting in Brussels are discussing. Europeans might rather prefer the deliberative ways espoused by their leaders to Trumpian chaos. Yet in foreign policy the contrast between the EU’s genteel, consensual decision-making rhythms and the brusque ways of strongmen even beyond America has grown starkly of late. Autocrats from China, Russia, Turkey and beyond are too often able to run rings around Europe.Josep Borrell, until December the EU’s foreign-policy chief, liked to describe the bloc as a “cacophony” of views. The clash of policies emanating from all corners of the continent might sound discordant, but allowing everyone to have their say is the inevitable upshot of a union made up of many small- and medium-sized countries for whom showing a common front is the only chance of remaining a global player. The problem it creates, however, is two-fold. First, it can take ages for everyone to weigh in; matters pertaining to foreign affairs are among those that still require unanimity of the EU’s 27 members. Second, divisions between Europeans become evident for all to see. Autocratic rivals, unburdened by the niceties of having to consult anyone other than themselves, can then divide and conquer Europe at their leisure.Take America, which these days shares the autocracies’ mistrust of global norms. Mr Trump has upended Europe twice of late, first by demanding governments there sharply increase defence spending, then announcing sweeping tariffs on imports from the EU. Both have caused divisions. Spain balked at pushing spending up to 3.5% of GDP, as NATO partners agreed in a summit in The Hague on June 25th, irking partners who think it cares little about the continent’s security. How to respond to tariffs has just as much potential to divide. Trade policy is the responsibility of the European Commission in Brussels, but it must work closely with member states. Many support the EU imposing its own tariffs on American goods—but want products made by their own industries exempted lest that attract retaliation from America. Belgium does not want tariffs on diamonds (or waffles, one might imagine), France and Italy on wine, Ireland on medical equipment and so on. Mr Trump faces no such internal opposition. Team America has one decision-maker, Team Europe has too many to count.Dealing with Xi Jinping has exposed Europe’s divisions just as clearly. Big exporters to China, notably Germany, have long pushed for more engagement with Beijing—not banging on about human rights while on government visits, for example. Some in Europe now see China as a hedge against America, a way to show Mr Trump that it has other options when it comes to trade. In July Mr Xi will host the heads of the EU’s main institutions in Beijing as part of a diplomatic charm offensive. Europeans are split. Some are keen on closer links with China; on a recent visit Pedro Sánchez of Spain called for more “balanced relations”. That is madness to those on the EU’s eastern fringe. They see China through the prism of its succour to Russia, whether through trade or dual-use equipment deliveries as it tries to conquer Ukraine. Who can do business with a leader who celebrated “Victory Day” with Vladimir Putin in Moscow just weeks ago?The Russian president was, for a time, the rare strongman who united Europe. Since his full-scale invasion of Ukraine in 2022, the EU has shown unexpected verve and unity (though often minus Hungary’s Viktor Orban). But soon he too may have the power to divide. Once some kind of peace deal between Russia and Ukraine is signed, it is easy to see the Kremlin engineering a deep schism in Europe by proposing to reopen the gas taps, offering unbeatable prices at first. The mere prospect of cheap energy is already being greeted enthusiastically in some German circles. That horrifies Ukraine’s most stalwart allies, for whom importing Russian gas is to finance Mr Putin’s future plans for conquest.A strongman closer to home—inside NATO, even—also divides the continent. Turkey’s Recep Tayyip Erdogan is, to some Europeans, a despot who defies basic democratic norms by imprisoning the opposition. But to those who worry about migration from the Middle East to Europe (which Turkey can stem by retaining migrants on its territory) or defence (Turkey has NATO’s largest armed forces in Europe and is a major arms-maker) those are peccadillos that can be overlooked. Similarly, Binyamin Netanyahu is treated as a war criminal by the Spanish and Irish, ever keen to show their support to oppressed Palestinians. But there are still notably few who will criticise him in, say, Germany or Hungary.Getting bested by strongmen was once a manageable problem for Europe. It believed that all countries would morph into liberal democracies as they got richer, eroding the problem of dealing with dodgy regimes over time. The EU’s consensual ways were ideally suited to influence the global liberal order it once predicted. Now the tough customers are bigger, closer, and show little sign of changing their ways. It is up to Europe to reconcile being a soft-superpower in a world where hard power increasingly rules. ■Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.