Britain - Feral Labour: why Sir Keir Starmer’s MPs have had enough

And why his government is in trouble. This time last year, Sir Keir Starmer was touring Britain during a general-election campaign with a simple message: “Stop the chaos.” The uncharismatic leader of the Labour Party offered little in the way of ideology. Policies were few. Instead, Sir Keir pledged a better process: stability and competence where the Conservatives could offer only infighting and ineptitude.It has not quite worked out like that. A year on, Sir Keir’s government is in trouble. A whopping 120 of his MPs have signed a wrecking amendment to Labour’s welfare bill, which aims to cut £5bn ($6.8bn, or 0.2% of gdp) from Britain’s bulging spending on disability benefit. A party that promised stability now offers its own brand of chaos. What made the Labour Party go feral?Most political problems begin with bad policy. Britain’s welfare bill stands at around 11% of GDP. Reform is necessary. But this particular cut was introduced largely so Labour did not breach its fiscal rules. The result was an ill-thought-through scheme, with haphazard brutality dished out to those with arthritis or Crohn’s disease. There were no winners, so nothing to console guilt-ridden Labour MPs traipsing through the Aye lobby.Nor was £5bn enough to placate any bond vigilante. Without big tax rises, or stingier conditions, Britain’s welfare state is unaffordable. Labour’s welfare cuts resemble the Woody Allen joke: the food here is terrible, and the portions are so small!The origins of Labour’s feral turn begin with its success. The party has a majority of 165. With that, expectations rise but discipline withers. Career prospects, always volatile for a backbench MP, worsen. There are well over 100 jobs in government but 400 people fighting for them. True, the typical backbench MP is a hyper-ambitious Millennial with an impressive parkrun time. But why bother following the whip if there is no reward at the end of it?After all, when animals go feral, they are simply returning to their natural state of being. Skim the CVs of Labour’s rebellious MPs and you find a collection of do-gooders. It is a party of Oxfam veterans and youth-club workers; highly educated and highly ambitious. They are not rabid leftists. But nor are they people who entered politics to cut benefits for the disabled.A Labour MP can vote to cut welfare—but in the same way a dog can be taught to walk on its hind legs. It is not something that comes naturally. Labour’s approach to training has been too brutal. Labour’s leadership has engaged in a strategy of “hippy-punching”—finding the most left-wing people in the party and giving them a hearty whack. Threatening milquetoast social democrats is something different. The wrecking amendment was tabled by Dame Meg Hillier, an experienced Labour MP whose day job is chair of the Treasury Committee, not handing out Socialist Worker outside Tube stations.Perhaps Labour’s backbenchers were always a little wilder than supposed. Profiles of the party’s incoming MPs painted them as Starmtroopers: docile and loyal to the point of lobotomisation. In truth, it was a more transactional relationship. Labour candidates fell into line because Sir Keir promised, and won, a big majority. At that point, Labour could set about doing the sort of things former Oxfam employees like, such as defending foreign aid and reducing child poverty.Sir Keir has not kept his end of the bargain. Downing Street has made a virtue of doing distinctly unLabourish things. It slashed the development budget to pay for extra defence spending, which, while pragmatic, was never going to impress an MP whose job used to be spending aid. It refused to lift the two-child limit on benefits, the fastest way of yanking children out of poverty. At the same time, Sir Keir has dragged the party’s polling to near apocalyptic levels.If Labour’s MPs are going feral, they are only following the path trodden by their constituents. Britain’s two-party system, where power swings between two moderate parties, has already shattered, with Nigel Farage’s Reform UK atop the polls. Now the shards are being ground to dust. The Green Party has surprisingly high support despite little media coverage. A new left-wing party headed by Jeremy Corbyn is mooted. Labour is stuffed with MPs who fear becoming one-term wonders, leaving no mark beyond a short Wikipedia entry. Desperate people do desperate things.Sir Keir is determined to push the vote through. It would be a gamble. A defeat would damage his authority within a parliamentary party that already regards the leadership with dwindling respect. (It took Sir Tony Blair, the last prime minister with such a huge majority, eight years to lose a vote.) And he risks a loss of credibility with Britain’s investors. Harder decisions are coming down the track. If Sir Keir cannot tame feral MPs on relatively modest reforms, can he manage more ambitious ones?Even if Sir Keir succeeds, converting a vast majority into a puny one, it would bode ill. A subtle leadership contest has already begun. Andy Burnham, the mayor of Greater Manchester, who has turned shaking his head and tutting at central government into an art, has sided with the rebels. And what if the rebellion rises? Feral backbench MPs are one thing; a feral cabinet is quite another.Labour’s leadership faces a more insidious problem. The most dangerous idea in British politics is the view that politicians are all the same; that each party acts like the other. Reform UK is a soap opera. Earlier this month its chairman flounced out, only to flounce back days later. Kemi Badenoch, the Conservative leader, will be fortunate to still be in a job next year, never mind at the next election. Sir Keir promised only stable government, rather than sweeping change. If Labour cannot provide that, then Sir Keir’s party offers nothing at all. ■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in Britain, sign up to Blighty, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.