Britain - Britain has bungled its taxes on the super-rich

Wealthy people are often accused of crying wolf. This time feels different. Palazzo Serristori, a newly restored palace housing luxury apartments, is a presence among the terracotta rooftops in Florence. Unoccupied for 30 years, its frescoed ceilings and gilded salons gathering dust, the building was sold hours before Italy went into lockdown in 2020. Marco Casarola, president of LDC Hotels & Resorts, the developer behind its €35m ($41m) makeover, says high-end properties were valued at €10,000 per square metre in 2017. Today they fetch double the price.The surge may be partly due to a policy change in Britain. The Labour government’s decision to scrap the country’s non-domicile tax regime, which until April allowed the ultra-rich to avoid taxes on offshore assets, has driven a wave of high-profile departures—and demand for luxury Italian property. Those relocating to Italy include Nassef Sawiris, Egypt’s richest man, and Richard Gnodde, a banker at Goldman Sachs. “There isn’t a wealthy person I know that is not leaving,” says Ann Kaplan Mulholland, a Canadian entrepreneur who is moving to Milan.The aim of the reforms was both to raise money and to make the tax system fairer. The old non-dom regime, dating back to 1799, when rich Britons accumulated vast fortunes across the empire, created problems of fairness and legitimacy, according to Alex Cobham of the Tax Justice Network, an advocacy group. “No other British taxpayer enjoys anything approaching this,” he says. Strained public finances amplified calls for change.Inevitably, tampering with these perks has prompted an outcry from the mega-rich—and claims that they are leaving in droves. Chris Walker, a former economist at the Treasury, estimates that one in ten of Britain’s 74,000 or so non-doms (as of April 2023) have left as a result of tax reforms, with more to follow. Firms such as Oxford Economics (a consultancy), the Adam Smith Institute (a think-tank) and Henley & Partners (an adviser to the footloose ultra-rich) all predict mass departures.Are such warnings overblown? Credible research on people ditching Fitzrovia for Florence is fiendishly hard to find. “Claims of a mass millionaire exodus simply don’t hold up to scrutiny,” insists Stephen Kinsella, a member of Patriotic Millionaires UK, a lobby group. A study co-authored by Arun Advani, a tax economist at the University of Warwick, finds that past patterns suggest the loss of a tax break for the super-rich results in a “significant” but “temporary” exodus. A 19% fall in their post-tax income, say, would be expected to lead to an outflow of about 5% of non-doms. But Mr Advani expects a larger behavioural response this time. That is because, unlike previous tweaks, the latest changes have abolished the non-dom regime entirely, removing protections that offshore property trusts once afforded the rich. The broadened scope of inheritance tax is the biggest worry. The decision to subject previously exempt offshore assets to the same 40% levy that ordinary wealthy Brits must pay is a key motivator for 83% of non-doms in any relocation decision, according to a poll by Oxford Economics. “It was always a bad design to have the inheritance-tax rate for foreigners jump from 0% to 40% overnight,” says Mr Advani. Heightened global competition also plays a role. Other jurisdictions have rolled out competitive tax regimes as London’s has become more punitive. Italy’s €200,000 flat tax has proved to be a magnet for the global rich, says Bill Thomson of Knight Frank, a property company. In America President Donald Trump has launched a “gold card” residency scheme in exchange for a $5m payment. Nearly 70,000 people have expressed interest, according to Howard Lutnick, the commerce secretary.By contrast, Britain has lost its distinctive advantage—the non-dom tax status. “The UK had the most attractive tax system,” says a property entrepreneur who requested anonymity. “Overnight it turned into one of the worst.” Having invested in British social housing, he takes umbrage at the perception of the ultra-wealthy as “tax dodgers”. Unless Britain reverses its decision on inheritance tax, he plans to leave. True, a new tax scheme is easing the overall impact. Since April the Foreign Income and Gains (FIG) regime has offered a four-year UK tax holiday on foreign income and capital gains for new arrivals before worldwide levies kick in. “It is a regime on steroids,” says Sara Vestin Rahmani of Bespoke Bureau, a staffing agency for nannies and butlers, which has seen a surge in demand since the scheme was announced.Yet a revolving door for the rich and mobile makes for a less predictable tax base. The Office for Budget Responsibility, Britain’s fiscal watchdog, has cautiously predicted that scrapping the non-dom tax status will raise £33.8bn ($46bn) for the Treasury over the next five years. By contrast, the Centre for Economics and Business Research, a think-tank, reckons that the government will raise negligible amounts if even a quarter of non-doms leave the country in the first year. Penalising the rich rarely pays off. Countries such as France and Sweden have swung sharply away from wealth taxes as a result.And now Britain itself appears to be rowing back. It is reportedly mulling a softening of its inheritance-tax reforms. Annoyingly for the government, Nigel Farage, the opportunistic leader of Reform UK, this week proposed an eye-catching flat tax of £250,000—similar to the scheme that has been luring non-doms to Italy.■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in Britain, sign up to Blighty, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.