Britain - The “motorsport mindset” behind Britain’s success in Formula One

Lessons from one of the country’s most successful industrial clusters. When drivers line up on the grid at the British Grand Prix on July 6th, they will be marking 75 years since the launch of the Formula One (F1) World Championship. Much has changed since the race in 1950 at the Silverstone circuit, which straddles Northamptonshire and Buckinghamshire. Then, the cars were basic, safety precautions rudimentary (ropes separated the track from the crowds) and the competitors included a Thai prince, a Swiss baron and a jazz musician.But Silverstone remains at the heart of things. Seven of the ten teams in this year’s championship are based fully or partly within a 100km radius of Silverstone. When Cadillac, owned by General Motors, starts competing next year the tally will rise to eight: it has already set up shop nearby. Audi is also sniffing around for premises in the area. And in the slipstream of the teams are more than 4,000 companies, from parts suppliers to PR firms. The industry employs 50,000 people and generated revenues of £16bn ($22bn) in 2023, up by around a quarter in real terms since 2012, according to figures released this week by the Motor Industry Association (MIA), a trade body. What has made Britain’s motorsport hub so successful?The glitz of F1 attracts talent and money. Backed by rich investors, teams splash out on cutting-edge equipment (the wind tunnels that test the aerodynamics of car parts can cost £50m-plus). Younger fans are drawn to the sport thanks in part to “Drive to Survive”, a Netflix series. “F1 The Movie”, a film starring Brad Pitt, is out this week. The British Grand Prix is now the most-attended paid sporting day in the country.Andy Cowell, the CEO of Aston Martin F1, talks about the “motorsport mindset”. Its engineers are experts at identifying problems, designing solutions, and making and testing prototypes. This happens fast, in the days between one race and the next. “The race is on in the factory,” says Mr Cowell. A huge screen looms over the central corridor in Aston Martin’s new facility at Silverstone, with a clock counting down the minutes until the next Grand Prix. Its mission-control room enables engineers to track race participants in real time. The place embodies high-precision, innovative engineering.These specialised firms are seeking to diversify beyond F1. During the pandemic, motorsport teams helped design and manufacture equipment for covid-19 patients who were struggling to breathe. Co-operation with the defence industry dates back even further. During the war in Afghanistan a firm supplying brakes to F1 redesigned the braking system of a patrol vehicle that was struggling with the weight of extra armour; it produced a solution much more rapidly than the usual defence contractors could.These efforts are stepping up a gear. McLaren Applied, which McClaren sold in 2021, works on deploying technology from motor racing into other industries. A consumer-goods giant, GSK, is churning out nearly 7m more tubes of toothpaste annually after McLaren applied its pit-lane approach to the company’s production line.The MIA is spearheading initiatives in defence and aerospace. The Silverstone Technology Cluster, a non-profit group set up to support engineering, electronics and software businesses, is doing similar work to apply motorsport prowess elsewhere. “We have experts here who can design smaller, lighter and more compact products to tight deadlines,” says its founder, Pim van Baarsen. He argues that fulfilling Britain’s manufacturing potential is not just about creating new clusters—it is also about making the most of the ones that already work well. ■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in Britain, sign up to Blighty, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.