Britain - The culture wars are coming for cousin marriage in Britain

Some on the political right are pushing for a ban. Marrying a first cousin has been legal in Britain since Henry VIII broke with Rome in the 16th century. The practice faded and became taboo as family sizes shrank and understanding of the genetic risks grew. In modern Britain unions between first cousins are rare, and for decades have been a non-issue.But there is a section of British society where cousin marriages are more common: Muslim communities, particularly Pakistani ones in the north of England. Precise numbers are elusive (no one collects them). But Born in Bradford, a study of about 13,500 families living in the West Yorkshire city between 2007 and 2011, found that 37% of married couples of Pakistani heritage were first cousins, compared with fewer than 1% of white British couples.Now some on the political right have begun pushing for a ban on cousin marriage. A Conservative MP, Richard Holden (pictured), introduced legislation in December, arguing in Parliament that “the practice is not really conducive to modern British society.” His bill, supported by Robert Jenrick, the runner-up in last year’s Tory leadership contest, is slated for a second reading in the House of Commons in July. But unless it can win government support it is unlikely to find sufficient parliamentary time to make it to a vote.There are health risks to consanguineous relationships but, as with many issues sucked into the culture wars, each side of the debate finds its own ways to interpret the data. The Born in Bradford study found that—after accounting for other risk factors such as age, obesity and smoking—having a child with a first cousin roughly doubles the chance of a congenital health problem, to 6% versus 3% in the broader population. John Wright, who led the research, is at pains to point out that cultural choices that are rarer in Muslim communities, such as drinking during pregnancy or having children later in life, also carry health risks. Compared with the average, children born to white British women over the age of 34 had double the chance of birth defects, the study found.For Mr Holden, any health issues are secondary to concerns around social integration. In his telling, the church’s restrictions on cousin marriage before 1540 helped break down barriers between tribes of Angles, Saxons, Jutes and Celts. “The British Pakistani community and, to a lesser degree, the Irish traveller community are removing themselves from wider society and closing themselves off,” he says. He argues that such marriages can be a means to strengthen clan loyalties at the expense of good citizenship.Dr Wright describes Mr Holden’s bid to outlaw cousin marriage as misguided. “Every time this topic and our research is in the media we receive vile racist and Islamophobic emails and messages, so no one should be under any illusion of how this taps into a deep and dark well of racism,” he says. The Muslim Council of Britain similarly dismisses attempts to legislate away a cultural practice. “It isn’t an issue that comes up in our discourse, nor do we feel it an important topic to expend time and energy into,” says Mustafa Al-Dabbagh, its assistant secretary-general.A ban would be popular, however. Polling published in May found that 77% of Britons want first-cousin marriage outlawed, rising to 82% among supporters of Reform UK, a nationalist party. Cousin marriage is joining burqa-wearing and grooming gangs as a thorny issue—with the extra dimension that marriage can be a route for chain migration.Other historically Protestant European countries with previously relaxed attitudes to cousin marriage are turning against it. Norway banned it last year. Sweden and Denmark are considering following suit.Opponents of a ban argue that it could push people away from civil ceremonies and into unofficial religious weddings. Mr Holden wants to head off this loophole by also outlawing sex with a cousin, through amendments to the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act, which criminalised forced marriage in 2014.At a public debate in December Nazir Afzal, a former chief prosecutor for north-west England who worked on the forced-marriage ban, said cousin marriage should remain legal and argued that rates are naturally falling. Politicising the issue would mean Muslims “will be reluctant to talk about it and educate others if they think it’s just a hammer which the far right would use to attack their communities”, said Mr Afzal, a practising Muslim.So far the Labour Party is studiously avoiding the matter. The previous government launched a broader review of marriage rules, including questions such as which venues can host weddings and whether humanist ceremonies can be legally binding. That has been rumbling on since 2014. On June 18th Alex Davies-Jones, a junior justice minister, said the government would announce an update to its position soon. Mr Holden thinks it unlikely Labour will support his bill: “I suspect they don’t want this argument.” ■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in Britain, sign up to Blighty, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.