Britain - Britain’s industrial strategy is unlikely to boost its economy

But it does at least focus on some of the right problems. FOR any lobbyist, the holy grail is a picture of the boss grinning in a hard hat. But a mention of your industry or technology at least shows that you are doing your job. “Everyone just desperately wants to be in it,” complains one exasperated policy wonk. “They act like it’s some kind of party boat,” says another.Welcome to the world of industrial strategy. On June 23rd Britain’s government published a 160-page plan it hopes will encourage the “companies of the future to emerge here”. The sprawling document spans wildly different sectors and is jammed with “transformative” funds, hubs and accelerators. All this, ministers say, will boost the economy, accelerate decarbonisation, help cities beyond London and make the country more resilient. Experience suggests some scepticism is in order.Long after it fell out of fashion in the 1980s, industrial policy had a deservedly poor reputation. Especially in Britain, it had been used to prop up languishing state behemoths. British Leyland was good at extracting handouts, not making cars. In the past decade, however, the idea has made a comeback. Faced with increased global threats, trade barriers and climate change, politicians have rediscovered a zeal for wielding the power of the state.Proponents of “modern industrial strategy”—the prefix is there to show they have learned from past mistakes—argue that it is no longer about bungs. Instead, it involves identifying sectors where you have an advantage and helping companies to make the most of it. Critics point out that politicians still love handing out money, are vulnerable to pleading by special interests and remain bad judges of which firms or technologies will succeed.Labour’s strategy follows one produced by the Conservatives in 2017, then largely abandoned. It distinguishes its approach from pure dirigisme, arguing that Britain has suffered from a state that both “stands back and interferes too much”. The approach is distinct, too, from the jam-spreading of Boris Johnson’s “levelling up”. The focus is not on ex-industrial towns, but city-regions and clusters that can benefit from agglomeration.The government does not spell out how much public money is involved. But our analysis suggests the extra spending—beyond plans made by the previous government—is modest, around £15bn over five years ($20bn, or 0.1% of GDP per year). Raising productivity, Labour acknowledges, will rely on making Britain more attractive to private investors. That means fixing the problems that eat into investors’ returns, from high energy costs to planning delays and burdensome regulation.Some might have worried about where this government would think extra investment (public or private) should go. After all, in April it was busy intervening in the steel industry, where British firms have long struggled to compete. Yet the eight sectors targeted in the strategy—advanced manufacturing, clean energy, creative industries, defence, digital and technology, financial services, life sciences, and professional and business services—do reflect a grasp of Britain’s strengths, even if some of them are odd bedfellows.Ministers judge these areas, covering one-third of the economy, to have the highest growth potential. Each gets its own “sector plan”. This is where things begin to become less convincing. For a start, most of these sectors are heavily reliant on higher education and immigration. Yet the government has little to say about Britain’s universities, whose business model it has undermined by reducing the flow of foreign students while continuing to cap tuition fees.There will be a new “global talent taskforce” to attract foreign researchers (this follows attempts by France and others to lure disgruntled American scientists). But it will rely on existing visa routes and is backed with only a small fund, which will partly go on administration. Elsewhere, too, the plan is hemmed in by the government’s lack of radicalism. Trying to fine-tune growth in narrow sectors—say, professional and business services—comes across as quixotic from a government that has ducked more obvious measures to boost dynamism across the economy, like serious tax reform. “There is no pinstripe-suit tax that the business department can easily target,” says Giles Wilkes of the Institute for Government, a think-tank.The result, as with previous industrial strategies, is a smorgasbord of small pots and schemes. There will be £18m for a clean-energy innovation centre in Felixstowe, £9.7m for a battery-training facility in Newcastle and £150m for a “creative places growth fund” (to be split six ways). This is manna for MPs and businesses (and lobbyists), who sift the plan in search of little goodies. But will it make any difference? The evidence suggests the productivity benefits of even well-targeted industrial policies are slim. And it is not obvious that British film studios are being held back by a lack of state intervention, says Sam Alvis of IPPR, another think-tank.There was more tangible action on one problem: industrial electricity costs, which have soared in Britain in recent years (see chart). That has clobbered energy-intensive firms in sectors like steel, glass and ceramics. Already, there have been a “significant number of casualties”, says Emma Parkinson of International Energy Products, a manufacturer based in Sheffield. It has probably also dampened investment in advanced manufacturing and AI, by making data centres less viable.In Britain the price of electricity is nearly always set by expensive gas. Bills have also been raised by charges and levies, which have been used to support the deployment of renewables. From 2027 the government will introduce exemptions, reducing bills by up to a quarter for around 7,000 businesses. Who exactly will pay for this remains unclear.A year into office, Labour has completed a spending review and published strategies for infrastructure and industry (on June 26th another is due on trade). But markets appear unpersuaded that there is a plan for raising growth in the long run. ■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in Britain, sign up to Blighty, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.