Business - The three rules of conference panels

One unfiltered moderator, three panellists and a universal experience. It’s precisely midday, and it’s my great pleasure to be chairing the last panel discussion of the morning. We’re going to spend the next 30 minutes talking about the impact of something important on something else important. I’m your moderator and I should have done more preparation.[12:01] Joining me is a stellar line-up of people you’ve never heard of. Furthest away from me is Lee Smyth, who is the vice-president for sustainability, communications, technology and stationery at the IDBBB. Next to him is Alan Pheasant, a serial entrepreneur. Alan has plainly forgotten the first rule of panels, which is that this is the only time your socks will have the attention of hundreds of people. And finally, looming over us on the big screen, like someone from the Galactic Empire, is Anne von Ark, head of investor relations at SilverMullet.[12:02] Anne, Al, Lee—which sounds so much worse now I say it out loud—welcome. Could I start by asking you to give me your brief opening thoughts on this vital topic? Lee, I’ll turn to you first.[12:07] Lee, I’m sorry to interrupt but we only have 23 minutes left for this session and so far the only thing you have told us is what the IDBBB does. Alan, can you perhaps pick up on what Lee said and make it sound interesting?[12:09] Apparently not. Emperor Palpatine, what is SilverMullet doing to mitigate the impact of the one thing on the other thing?[12:11] Thank you, Anne. Too late, I now remember the second rule of conference panels, which is never to ask people for opening remarks. We have less than 20 minutes left, so a reminder to the audience that I will be coming to you for questions soon. You can either raise your hand or send them in via the event app if you can get it to work.[12:12] Lee, I know this next question makes no sense at all but it sounds clever. What do you think would count as a DeepSeek moment in this context?[12:15] I’m sorry to interrupt again, Lee, but we’ve only got 15 minutes left now and all I can really say with certainty is that you are employed by the IDBBB. Let’s throw it out to the audience for questions. I see a hand up at the back there: the thick-set gentleman in glasses. Just wait for the microphone, please…Oh, I’m so sorry, madam. It’s very dark out there, so all I can see are your silhouettes. What was your question?[12:20] That wasn’t really a question, was it? More like a filibuster. Are you related to Lee, by any chance?[12:21] More questions, please. Don’t be shy. I can see more hands going up. Let’s go to the woman in the terrible sweater. Please wait for the microphone to get to you. Just don’t expect it to get there quickly. The third rule of conference panels is that at least 10% of it will be spent watching someone carrying the microphone to the wrong person. Another 5% will be spent on the eventual recipients treating it like a Neanderthal being handed a toaster: tapping on it, blowing on it, looking at it in apparent wonder.[12:22] Do go ahead, madam. Stop tapping it. What was your question?[12:22] I have literally no idea what you just said. But let me rephrase it in a way that suits me. I think what you are asking is what we’d be saying if we were to be asked back for the same panel in 2030. I know what Lee would be saying: something interminable about the IDBBB. So let’s turn this one over to Alan.[12:26] Thank you, Alan. We have time for one more question. Can we go to the misshapen person right at the back with two hands up? Further back, further back. That’s the one. What’s that? It’s a potted plant? Well then, let’s try and round up everything we have learned. Anne, from your vantage point on the bridge of the Imperial Super Star Destroyer, what’s the one thing people should take away from this session, apart from regrets?[12:28] Alan, Lee, anything brief you want to add in the final minutes?[12:30] I’m sorry to cut you short again, Lee. Our time is up, and it will take us several minutes to get out of these ludicrously deep armchairs. Lunch is now being served. We’ll be back here in the main hall in an hour. Please join me in thanking our amazing panellists for a very informative discussion.■Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.