Finance & economics - How to escape taxes on your stocks

Not that American investors need a guide—a booming industry is doing the job for them. An investor’s desire to minimise his dues is nothing new. “The avoidance of taxes”, said John Maynard Keynes, “is the only intellectual pursuit that still carries any reward”. What is new is the scale and speed at which the desire is transforming financial intermediaries, wealth management and even the notion of passive investing. Once the preserve of the ultra-rich, the drive to minimise taxes has reshaped America’s financial system.Everything from the “separately managed account” industry (with $2.7trn of assets under management) and robo-advisers (an estimated $1.2trn) to exchange-traded-funds ($15.5trn) now caters to an investor’s desire to minimise taxes. Beneath these behemoths is a plethora of niche offerings, such as exchange funds and 1031 exchanges, as well as more sophisticated strategies such as “heartbeat trades”, “box spreads” and “long-short dynamic tax-loss harvesting”. Whereas tax advice was once dispensed by a well-dressed fellow in a wood-panelled office, today it arrives through bespoke algorithms.Asset managers have embraced the shift with gusto. JPMorgan Chase last year said that its newish tax-strategy line was its fastest-growing business; BlackRock is a big player; Neuberger Berman, which on June 23rd announced a new “tax-managed long/short” strategy, is another. Fintech platforms, such as Betterment and Wealthfront, and boutique firms built upon tax efficiency, including Alpha Architect, NDVR and Quantinno, are keen. In pitches to clients, even large investment funds such as AQR Capital Management and ARK Invest now focus on after-tax returns, rather than pre-tax outperformance.The modern playbook for avoiding the taxman uses old techniques in new ways. Chief among them is the treatment of capital gains. Investors are taxed on the difference between the sale price of an asset, such as a stock, and its original purchase price. Since the levy applies to net capital gains across an entire portfolio, financial-services firms noticed that they could lower their clients’ tax bills if they realised losses alongside gains. Thus arose the strategy of “tax-loss harvesting”, which involves investors selectively selling underperforming assets, often with the intention of repurchasing them soon after.Such strategies are more effective when investors have control over their investments, exposure to lots of assets and can automate the process of selling and repurchasing. This is what many new products offer. Take separately managed accounts (SMAs), which are owned by individuals but overseen by asset managers. Since they hold securities directly, rather than in a pooled fund, and can be tailored to each investor, they fast became a crucial tool for the rich after being offered by banks in the early 2000s. Growth has exploded recently. Since acquiring Aperio, a specialist, in 2021, BlackRock has overseen a more than 20% year-on-year rise in the firm’s SMA assets. Combined assets in SMAs held at BlackRock, Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley and JPMorgan were worth $1.4trn at the end of last year—roughly $400bn more than those under management by the world’s 20 largest hedge funds.Investors seeking the benefits of SMAs without the hefty minimum investments or need for customisation may find their way to direct indexing or robo-advising. As the name suggests, direct indexing involves holding the individual stocks that make up an index, rather than the whole index. Since indices will inevitably contain some underperforming stocks, investors can sell these for tax offsets—even when the broader market is rising. Robo-advising automates the process of identifying losing positions and scheduling repurchases, sparing investors the need to do so themselves. These products have grown fast, too. In the past two years, Vanguard’s robo-advisory platform saw its assets under management rise from $6bn to $21bn. Some $865bn has been invested in direct indexing. S&P Global, a data firm, expects that figure to reach $1.1trn by 2028.A second pillar of the tax code explains the rise of the ETF over its ageing cousin, the mutual fund. For all their benefits, mutual funds are remarkably tax-inefficient. When an investor redeems shares, the fund may have to sell appreciated assets, triggering capital gains for all shareholders in the fund. One way to think of an ETF, the joke goes, is as a mutual fund that does not pay taxes. Investors trading in and out do so on a secondary market with other investors, without triggering any sales by the fund itself. More importantly, even when an ETF does need to trade on the primary market—say, to accommodate inflows or outflows from large investors—it typically does so by handing over a basket of appreciated stocks in exchange for ETF shares. Because this redemption is “in kind”, and no cash changes hands, the Internal Revenue Service looks the other way.This quirk may seem insignificant, but the benefits it confers are profound. Derek Horstmeyer of George Mason University and co-authors compared the post-tax returns of ETFs with those of mutual funds. They found an average gap, or “tax alpha”, of 0.2 percentage points a year, which is more than the total decline in average fees on passive funds over the past 30 years.This has saved investors hundreds of millions of dollars. It has also transformed the structure of corporate ownership. ETFs now hold over 9% of all American companies’ stocks, up from 0.2% in 2000. The less tax-efficient mutual-fund sector, by contrast, peaked in 2008 at 25% of stockmarket ownership and has since fallen to 17%. Although ETFs have other benefits, such as liquidity and low fees, Rabih Moussawi at Villanova University and co-authors find that the different tax regimes account for most of the reallocation between ETFs and mutual funds. They show that, even controlling for fees and performance, the relative tax burden of mutual funds against ETFs is strongly predictive of outflows. On top of this, tax-sensitive investors are more likely to invest in ETFs.Some strategies are trickier. Many explicitly tax-aware ETFs, which have burgeoned in recent years, seek to replace dividends (taxed in the year of receipt) with capital gains (taxed on sale), or to avoid interest income (taxed even more) altogether. But even sophisticated strategies tend to layer or enhance a smaller set of core techniques. Want to combine in-kind redemptions with tax-loss harvesting? A “heartbeat trade” allows ETF exchanges to swap assets that have gained a lot for those that have gained less. Not content to wait for losses to appear in a portfolio? An investor may pursue a “long-short” tax-loss harvesting strategy, ensuring that one of two legs always has a loss to be harvested.If the desire to minimise taxes is old, what explains the recent explosion in the use of such stategies? It is not because of a change to the rules. The wash-sale law, which governs how soon investors can repurchase assets after harvesting a loss, has been on the books since 1921. The legal basis for the in-kind redemption mechanism of ETFs dates to 1986. And although capital-gains-tax rates do fluctuate, they have remained fairly constant in recent years.Stranger still is that many vehicles at the core of the tax-aware industry were not set up with tax efficiency in mind. When ETFs were launched in 1990, it was to allow investors to trade throughout the day. Robo-advisers set out to automate financial advice rather than tax-loss harvesting. Even SMAs were about customisation for the rich rather than careful tax planning. Evolutionary biologists use the term “carcinisation” to describe the curious tendency of crustaceans to independently evolve into crab-like forms. Something similar seems to happen with financial products.What has changed is technology. Consider a strategy as conceptually simple as direct indexing. In the pre-digital era, manually harvesting across dozens or hundreds of individual stocks would have been a nightmare to do even once a year, let alone constantly. Now the tracking, sale and repurchase of assets can be handled by a simple algorithm and click of a button.Another barrier was transaction costs. Unless an investor parks his money in a passive ETF, most tax-aware portfolios require high turnover. Investors must regularly sell losers and repurchase them no sooner than 30 days later, all while trading back towards their desired index exposure. Such churn once imposed costs that would have wiped out any tax advantage. A study published in 2000 by Brad Barber of the University of California, Davis, and Terrance Odean of the University of California, Berkeley, found that, for some retail traders in the early 1990s, the average round-trip trade with a value of more than $1,000 incurred 3% in commissions and a 1% in bid-ask spread (essentially the transaction cost of a trade). Today commissions are close to zero and bid-ask spreads for leading stocks are often 0.15% or lower.Such “supply side” factors would have mattered little were it not for a commensurate surge in demand for tax minimisation. The cumulative return on the S&P 500 index from 2010 until the end of 2024 was about 600%, which has left Americans holding enormous unrealised gains. With a generation of baby-boomers now looking to convert these into cash for their retirement, it is little wonder they have sought to do so while minimising their payments to Uncle Sam. Many gains are highly concentrated, too, driven by high-performing stocks such as Nvidia, a chip designer, and Tesla, an electric-car maker, or by ownership of whole businesses. Without planning, realising gains—whether to cash out or to rebalance a portfolio—can trigger an unpleasant tax bill.Last, wealth managers’ incentives have aligned with technological progress and rising demand. The rise of index-fund providers such as BlackRock and Vanguard, the subsequent collapse in fees and the difficulty of outperforming the benchmark has left many asset managers looking for new ways to justify their charges. Tax-aware strategies offer one such way.Economists may question whether the industry’s tax-aware evolution is good for markets. After all, it is difficult to argue that sheltering portfolios in tax-efficient wrappers furthers the central aims of finance, namely price discovery and the efficient allocation of risk. Moreover, the process is a zero-sum game: what investors gain, the government forgoes. At the same time, however, there is some good news. The yen for tax efficiency is unlikely to distort markets much and—to the extent that individuals are better stewards of capital than the government—is perhaps even beneficial. Just as the decline in management fees has been celebrated, so should a lower tax burden on investors.The more salient criticism of the new approach is not that it distorts markets, but that its benefits are skewed towards those who need them least and (in some cases) may be overstated. Stockmarket ownership is remarkably concentrated. Some 40% of Americans hold no stocks at all; many who do invest do so through vehicles that already offer lower tax contributions, such as pensions. What is more, precisely since taxes on capital gains are levied in a progressive manner, rising with the size of the gains in question, the ability to escape them will disproportionately benefit investors in higher tax brackets. A paper by Nathan Sosner of AQR Capital Management and co-authors suggests that returns achieved by high-net-worth individuals can exceed those of retail investors by as much as 1.4 percentage points a year. For its part, Vanguard quotes different tax-savings estimates for ultra-high-net-worth clients and merely high-net-worth ones.Although retail investors unquestionably benefit from the tax efficiencies of ETFs, the case for moving into more advanced strategies is less clear. Many tax-aware funds charge higher fees than their passive peers—often 0.3-0.5 percentage points more of the portfolio a year. That may seem modest but, in perpetuity, it represents as much as a 5% haircut on a portfolio’s value. Add to that the tracking error when straying from an index, along with the complexity of pairing gains with losses, and many investors are better off sticking with a passive ETF. And as investors harvest losses to offset capital gains, they leave a large tax bill for the future, having deferred, not avoided, levies.For years, most financiers viewed investment taxes as a fixed cost to be paid, rather than as an active force that shapes markets. The recent explosion of strategies and vehicles drastically changes the picture. Many have come to see taxes as an important constraint when constructing a portfolio. As Charlie Munger, the former vice-chairman of Berkshire Hathaway, a mighty conglomerate, once quipped: “Show me the incentive, and I will show you the outcome.” It does not take as astute an investor as Munger to see the connection between the desire to avoid tax and the shape of the modern market. ■For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in economics, finance and markets, sign up to Money Talks, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.