Business - Wendell Weeks, the small-town boss at the big-tech table   

Corning’s boss is a corporate stalwart with a passion for glass. In his office in upstate New York, Wendell Weeks is about to do an ad hoc product demonstration. He brandishes something he calls a Norwegian hammer, a device used to test how resistant materials are to hard knocks. Mr Weeks first experiments on a thin sheet of metal; the hammer leaves a visible dent. Then he places the hammer over a small sample of glass; its percussive impact leaves no trace.This parlour trick is designed to reveal the unexpected properties that glass can have. But it also reflects the unusual blend of folksiness and futurism that characterises Mr Weeks, the chief executive and chairman of Corning Inc, a 174-year-old materials firm. His homespun approach to management has helped keep his firm at the heart of the digital economy.Glass was first made by humans around 4,000 years ago; Mr Weeks’s demo feels almost as old-fashioned. And yet decade after decade, Corning keeps popping up at the cutting edge of technology. In the late 19th century, it made the encasements for Edison’s light bulbs. In the early 20th century, it invented Pyrex. Under Mr Weeks, its fibre-optics have become an essential part of the infrastructure of the internet. Corning made the glass for the first iPhone. Now it is a big supplier of the cables that run through data centres.The company takes its name from a town of just over 10,000 people, where it is still based today. Corning is a place of ice-cream shops, honey-locust trees and friendly folk. Mr Weeks first went there as an auditor, working for PriceWaterhouseCoopers. His childhood had been chaotic: both his parents were alcoholics, and his father’s plumbing business had gone bankrupt. Corning, at first a client, seemed like the kind of steady company Mr Weeks wanted to work at full-time—and 42 years “of service” later, he is still there.Before becoming its chief executive in 2005, Mr Weeks was running Corning’s optical-communications business. In the 1990s fibre-optic cables made Corning a big beneficiary of the dotcom boom—and then a victim of the bust. Although Mr Weeks’s division was the one that had caused the damage, he was soon appointed to the top job.The crash taught Mr Weeks the importance of humility. If you catch a big trend, “you actually start to believe that you’re really smart, and you see this happen again and again with folks”. It also taught him to appreciate what he calls “the strong arms of [his] brothers and sisters”. It’s the kind of phrase that is unexpected from the mouth of a trained accountant, but Mr Weeks has a spiritual streak: he quotes Marcus Aurelius and Miyamoto Musashi, a 17th-century Japanese swordsman.If Mr Weeks learned important lessons from the dotcom bust, he has absorbed others from America’s tech royalty. He has sat alongside Jeff Bezos on Amazon’s board since 2016. And in early 2007 he had another formative experience, courtesy of Steve Jobs. Apple’s boss rang to ask for Corning’s help on a product that was launching later that year: he wanted a scratch-resistant glass case for the iPhone.Mr Weeks’s team came up with a composition that would fit the bill, but did not think it would be able to fulfil the order on its own. Mr Weeks told Jobs as much over dinner, only for Jobs to retort that he was scared, and that his fear of failure was depriving his colleagues of the chance to take part in history.It’s obvious that Mr Weeks has had more enjoyable meals (”Steve could make you realise things pretty quickly…it helps by not being that sensitive to others’ feelings.”) But he also saw the truth in what the boss of Apple said. Mr Weeks told Corning’s board that the firm would meet Apple’s request.That first foray into smartphone glass spawned a division called Gorilla Glass, which has since earned the tribute of an antitrust investigation by the European Commission. It also helped to crystallise an approach to innovation that carries through to the present day. The iPhone request could be fulfilled because of work that Corning had done decades earlier on thickened glass for car windshields. That product had an obvious drawback (would you prefer to hit thickened glass in an accident?) but the property of being stronger came in use eventually.Mr Weeks calls strength, scratch resistance and other kinds of valuable properties “vectors”. He operates on the assumption that making progress on a vector will work out well for Corning, even if he doesn’t know precisely when. For optical communications, density is a vector: if you can fit more cabling in a certain space, the likelihood is that it will come in handy at some point. And so it has. Meta’s giant new data centre in Louisiana will need perhaps 8m miles of cable, enough to connect all the single-family homes in New York state. Mr Weeks spends a lot of his own time working with small teams of researchers on just these vectors; colleagues recall him joining them at the whiteboard as they tried to make the first glass for the iPhone.The job of every chief executive is to connect people inside the firm with people outside it. But Corning bridges worlds that are strikingly distant—the academic expertise of glass researchers and the demands of investors on Wall Street, the sleepiness of a small town and the pace of the world’s biggest tech firms. If part of Mr Weeks’s role is to bring these worlds together, another is to keep them apart. “We don’t view our job as to take the harshness of the world outside and bring it inside,” he says. Test the culture, by all means. But don’t break it. ■