Finance & economics - Politicians slashed migration. Now they face the consequences

Across the West the number of new arrivals is plummeting. LAST YEAR net migration to Britain halved: the country’s population grew by just 431,000, down from 860,000 in 2023. In the final quarter of 2024 some 60,000 people, net, moved to Canada, a drop from 420,000 in mid-2023. In April net migration to America slowed to an annualised pace of 600,000, an enormous fall from 4m or so in 2023. In March net migration to New Zealand was down by 80% from its peak in late 2023.Almost wherever you look across the rich world, you see a similar pattern. After a huge, indeed unprecedented, rise in 2022-23, migration to the rich world is plummeting (see chart 1).What will this mean for Western economies? Some of the decline was inevitable. The earlier surge in part reflected “catch-up” after a collapse in migration during the covid-19 pandemic, when governments everywhere closed borders. Labour shortages in the post-covid economy have largely disappeared, reducing the incentive for someone to move abroad in search of work. The humanitarian crisis in Ukraine, during which millions of people fled the country, has passed its acute phase.Yet new policies are also playing a big role. The most radical are in America, where President Donald Trump has increased surveillance of the border with Mexico, through which millions of people have passed in recent years. Now almost no one makes the journey. The Trump administration has made it harder for foreigners to obtain visas. And the number of deportation flights is currently 25% higher than a year ago, suggest data compiled by Thomas Cartwright, an independent researcher. Would-be migrants will also be deterred by high-profile raids by Immigration and Customs Enforcement officers.America is not the only place ramping up deportations. In the final quarter of last year governments in the European Union expelled 30,000 third-country nationals, up 30% year on year. In Hungary deportations tripled; in Ireland they rose from just 80 in the last quarter of 2023 to 465 in the first quarter of 2025. Policy changes in other countries are less extreme, but still significant. Britain is introducing new restrictions for would-be migrants, including stronger language requirements, and Sir Keir Starmer, the country’s prime minister, is using a less welcoming tone. Mark Carney, Canada’s new prime minister, wants to impose a cap on numbers.Lots of politicians, as well as a handful of economists, argue that high immigration drags down living standards. It depresses wages, the argument goes, and raises the cost of housing. If true, then today’s declining migration should be starting to boost workers’ living standards. Developments in financial markets might give succour to nativist politicians. In recent months the share prices of American companies that are highly exposed to labour costs, such as consultancies and those in hospitality and retail, have underperformed the wider index—suggesting, perhaps, that investors believe wage growth will soon speed up.But the early economic evidence tells a different story. Having won elections promising to cut migration, politicians across the rich world will now have to deal with the consequences of actually doing so.Consider the labour market. According to a tracker compiled by Goldman Sachs, a bank, overall wage growth across advanced economies has fallen from a recent peak of 4.8% year on year to around 3.8%, which is precisely the opposite of what anti-migration types had expected (see chart 2). The average unemployment rate remains low, but is also inching up. In Canada unemployment has jumped by two percentage points from its recent low, one of the worst performances of any rich country. This is not consistent with the idea that immigrants had stolen jobs from their hosts. Indeed, it is more plausible that some of leaving immigrants had previously employed native workers.We have examined American wage data, focusing on occupations where there is a high proportion of foreign-born workers. Such jobs include drywall installers and janitors. Immediately before Mr Trump came to office, average wage growth in these “immigration-exposed occupations” exceeded the overall average. But so far this year, as net migration has plummeted and competition for these jobs has in theory declined, wage growth has actually slowed. Now these occupations have weaker wage growth than the average.Developments in the housing market tell a similar story. It is true that across the rich world from 2022 to 2024 housing markets behaved oddly. Rents soared and sale prices were steady, even in the face of rapidly rising interest rates, which made mortgages much more expensive. Research suggests that high immigration probably contributed to this state of affairs. A meta-analysis by William Cochrane and Jacques Poot, both of the University of Waikato, finds that a 1% increase in the migrant population of a city leads to a 0.5-1% rise in rents. J.D. Vance, America’s vice-president, has drawn attention to this link.Yet falling migration is so far not delivering cheaper housing. Rental inflation across the rich world is still high, at 5% year on year according to our calculations, and in recent months has fallen more slowly than overall inflation. In many of the countries where migration is coming down most quickly, including America and Britain, house prices are nonetheless rising fast. The housing market’s robust performance is consistent with another idea from the academic literature: though migrants may at the margin raise the cost of housing, other factors matter a lot more.Could the benefits of more measured migration be delayed? Perhaps. But then again migrants do not just impose costs—they also bring benefits. They demand their own goods and services, lifting employment for others. They tend to take jobs natives do not want, which research suggests allows their hosts to move into more lucrative professions. And they are a big source of labour in construction, which enables homes to be built. Western politicians have promised to toughen borders and raise living standards. They may now find themselves struggling to deliver on the second part of their vows. ■Stay on top of American politics with The US in brief, our daily newsletter with fast analysis of the most important political news, and Checks and Balance, a weekly note from our Lexington columnist that examines the state of American democracy and the issues that matter to voters.